A group of alpha-1,4-glucan lyase genes from the fungi Morchella costata, M. vulgaris and Peziza ostracoderma. Cloning, complete sequencing and heterologous expression.
We here report genes encoding a newly discovered class of starch- and glycogen-degrading enzyme, alpha-1,4-glucan lyase (EC 4.2.2.13), which degrades starch and glycogen to 1,5-anhydro-D-fructose. Two lyases were purified and partially sequenced from the macrofungi Morchella costata and M. vulgaris. The obtained lyase amino acid sequences were used to generate PCR primers, which were further used to probe the fungal genomic libraries. Two lyase genes (Agll1;Mo.cos and Agll1;Mo.vul) from the two fungi were fully sequenced and found to contain a coding region of 3201 bp and 3213 bp, respectively. A total of 13 small introns were found in each of the two genes with identical positions. The two lyase genes share 86% identity at the amino acid level. They encode mature lyases with 1066 and 1070 amino acids, respectively. The deduced molecular masses of 121,530 and 121,971 Da agree with the values found for the two purified lyases. A structure analysis of the promoter regions of the lyase genes revealed a number of putative regulatory DNA elements, such as the AREA and CREA sites, which are related to nitrogen and carbon metabolism, respectively, and the CCAAT/CAAT boxes, which are related to basal expression of genes. A third lyase gene (Agll1;Pe.ost) from the fungus Peziza ostracoderma was partially sequenced to 557 bp. The amino acid sequence deduced from this nucleotide fragment shares 76% identity with the M. costata lyase. Heterologous expression of the M. costata lyase gene was achieved intracellularly in Pichia pastoris and Aspergillus niger.
['Amino Acid Sequence', 'Ascomycota/*enzymology/*genetics', 'Aspergillus niger/genetics', 'Base Sequence', 'Cloning, Molecular', 'DNA Primers/genetics', 'DNA, Fungal/genetics', 'Gene Expression', '*Genes, Fungal', 'Genomic Library', 'Introns', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Molecular Weight', 'Pichia/genetics', 'Polysaccharide-Lyases/chemistry/*genetics', 'Recombinant Proteins/chemistry/genetics', 'Sequence Homology, Amino Acid']