Identification of an NADH-cytochrome b(5) reductase gene from an arachidonic acid-producing fungus, Mortierella alpina 1S-4, by sequencing of the encoding cDNA and heterologous expression in a fungus, Aspergillus oryzae.
Based on the sequence information for bovine and yeast NADH-cytochrome b(5) reductases (CbRs), a DNA fragment was cloned from Mortierella alpina 1S-4 after PCR amplification. This fragment was used as a probe to isolate a cDNA clone with an open reading frame encoding 298 amino acid residues which show marked sequence similarity to CbRs from other sources, such as yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), bovine, human, and rat CbRs. These results suggested that this cDNA is a CbR gene. The results of a structural comparison of the flavin-binding beta-barrel domains of CbRs from various species and that of the M. alpina enzyme suggested that the overall barrel-folding patterns are similar to each other and that a specific arrangement of three highly conserved amino acid residues (i.e., arginine, tyrosine, and serine) plays a role in binding with the flavin (another prosthetic group) through hydrogen bonds. The corresponding genomic gene, which was also cloned from M. alpina 1S-4 by means of a hybridization method with the above probe, had four introns of different sizes. These introns had GT at the 5' end and AG at the 3' end, according to a general GT-AG rule. The expression of the full-length cDNA in a filamentous fungus, Aspergillus oryzae, resulted in an increase (4.7 times) in ferricyanide reduction activity involving the use of NADH as an electron donor in the microsomes. The M. alpina CbR was purified by solubilization of microsomes with cholic acid sodium salt, followed by DEAE-Sephacel, Mono-Q HR 5/5, and AMP-Sepharose 4B affinity column chromatographies; there was a 645-fold increase in the NADH-ferricyanide reductase specific activity. The purified CbR preferred NADH over NADPH as an electron donor. This is the first report of an analysis of this enzyme in filamentous fungi.
['Amino Acid Sequence', 'Animals', 'Arachidonic Acid/*metabolism', 'Aspergillus oryzae/enzymology/genetics', 'Cattle', 'Cloning, Molecular', 'Cytochrome Reductases/chemistry/*genetics/isolation & purification/*metabolism', 'Cytochrome-B(5) Reductase', 'DNA, Complementary/genetics', 'Humans', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Mortierella/*enzymology/*genetics', 'Rats', 'Sequence Alignment', 'Sequence Analysis, DNA']