Cloning, expression, characterization, and nucleophile identification of family 3, Aspergillus niger beta-glucosidase.
The beta-glucosidase from Aspergillus niger (CMI CC 324262) was purified, and an N-terminal sequence and two internal sequences were determined. BglI genomic gene and the cDNA were cloned from a genomic library and by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, respectively. The cDNA was successfully expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Pichia pastoris. Sequence analysis revealed that the gene encodes a 92-kDa enzyme that is a member of glycosidase family 3. (1)H-NMR analysis of the reaction catalyzed by this enzyme confirmed that, in common with other family 3 glycosidases, this enzyme hydrolyzes with net retention of anomeric configuration. Accordingly, the enzyme was inactivated by 2-deoxy-2-fluoro beta-glucosyl fluoride, with kinetic parameters of k(i) = 4.5 min(-1), K(I) = 35.4 mM, through the trapping of a covalent glycosyl enzyme intermediate. The catalytic competence of this intermediate was demonstrated by the fact that incubation with linamarin resulted in reactivation, presumably via a transglycosylation mechanism. Peptic digestion of the 2-deoxy-2-fluoroglucosyl enzyme and subsequent analysis of high pressure liquid chromatography eluates by electrospray ionization triple quadrupole mass spectrometry in the neutral loss mode allowed the localization of a 2-deoxy-2-fluoroglucosyl-peptide. Sequence determination of this labeled peptide by tandem mass spectrometry in the daughter ion scan mode permitted the identification of Asp-261 as the catalytic nucleophile within the sequence VMSDW. Asp-261 is fully conserved within this family, consistent with its key role, and aligns with the aspartic acid residue previously identified in the Aspergillus wentii enzyme by labeling with conduritol B epoxide (Bause, E., and Legler, G. (1974) Hoppe-Seyler's Z. Physiol. Chem. 355, 438-442).
['Amino Acid Sequence', 'Aspergillus niger/*enzymology', 'Base Sequence', 'Cloning, Molecular', 'DNA, Fungal', 'Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel', 'Mass Spectrometry', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Sequence Homology, Amino Acid', 'beta-Glucosidase/chemistry/*genetics/isolation & purification']