Genes encoding cytochrome P450 and monooxygenase enzymes define one end of the aflatoxin pathway gene cluster in Aspergillus parasiticus.
The identification of overlapping cosmids resulted in the discovery of the aflatoxin biosynthetic pathway gene cluster in Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus. This finding led to the cloning and characterization of one regulatory and 16 structural genes involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis, including the most recent report on the gene, ordA, which has been identified to be involved in the formation of four aflatoxins (B1, B2, G1 and G2). However, these genes do not account for all the identified chemical/biochemical steps in aflatoxin synthesis and efforts are underway to identify the genes controlling the other steps. We are also attempting to define the outer boundaries of the aflatoxin pathway gene cluster in the Aspergillus genome. For this goal, we extended sequencing in both directions from the existing (60 kb) aflatoxin pathway gene cluster, beyond the pksA gene at one end and the omtA gene at the other. Within the 25-kb genomic DNA sequence determined at the omtA end of the cluster, several new gene sequences were identified. The recently reported genes, vbs and ordA, were found within this 25-kb region. Two additional genes were also found in this region, a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase encoding gene, tentatively named cypX, and a monooxygenase encoding gene, tentatively named moxY, and these are also reported in this study. The sequence beyond these genes showed a 5-kb non-coding region of DNA followed by the presence of a cluster of genes probably involved in sugar metabolism. Northern blot analysis and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) studies demonstrated that the genes, cypX and moxY, are expressed concurrently with genes involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis. Therefore, the two putative aflatoxin pathway genes cypX and moxY followed by a 5-kb non-coding region of DNA define one end of the boundary of the aflatoxin pathway gene cluster in A. parasiticus.
['Aflatoxins/*biosynthesis/genetics', 'Amino Acid Sequence', 'Aspergillus/*enzymology/genetics/growth & development', 'Base Sequence', 'Culture Media', 'Cytochrome P-450 Enzyme System/chemistry/*genetics/metabolism', 'DNA, Fungal/genetics', '*Fungal Proteins', '*Genes, Fungal', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Multigene Family', 'Oxygenases/chemistry/*genetics/metabolism', 'Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Sequence Analysis, DNA']