Development of a nested polymerase chain reaction assay for the detection and identification of Pythium insidiosum.
Pythium insidiosum is an important cause of cutaneous and gastrointestinal disease in horses and dogs in the southeastern United States. Culture-based diagnosis of pythiosis is rarely definitive because production and identification of reproductive structures is difficult. The purpose of this study was to develop a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based assay for the identification of P insidiosum. Genomic DNA was extracted from 3 clinical isolates of P insidiosum and I isolate each of Pythium graminicola and Pythium arrhenomanes. The ITS I region of the ribosomal RNA gene of each isolate was amplified and sequenced, and the resultant sequences were aligned with published sequences for Pythium aphanidermatum, P acanthicum, and P myriotylum. A pair of P insidiosum-specific primers (PI-1 and PI-2) were designed from variable regions within the ITSI region. A nested PCR assay was developed in which the 1st round amplified the ITSI region by use of universal fungal primers. Second-round amplification utilized the internal P insidiosum-specific primers PI-1 and PI-2. Specificity of the assay was tested with DNA extracted from cultures of the following: 10 clinical isolates of P insidiosum and 1 isolate each of P graminicola, P irregulare, P arrhenomanes, P myriotylum, P deliense, Basidiobolus ranarum, Conidiobolus coronatus, Aspergillus terreus, Lagenidium giganteum, and a canine-pathogenic Lagenidium species. Nested PCR produced a single 105-base pair amplicon for each of the P insidiosum isolates, but did not produce amplicons for any of the other isolates. Results of this study suggest that PCR is a useful tool for the identification of P insidiosum.
['Animals', 'Base Sequence', 'Cats', 'DNA Primers', 'DNA, Ribosomal/analysis/chemistry', 'Dogs', 'Gene Amplification', 'Genes, rRNA', 'Horses', 'Humans', 'Infection/diagnosis/microbiology/*veterinary', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Phylogeny', 'Plant Roots/microbiology', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods/*veterinary', 'Pythium/classification/genetics/*isolation & purification', 'RNA, Ribosomal/genetics', 'Sequence Alignment/veterinary', 'Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid']