Characterisation of the gptA gene, encoding UDP N-acetylglucosamine: dolichol phosphate N-acetylglucosaminylphosphoryl transferase, from the filamentous fungus, Aspergillus niger.
The production of asparagine (N)-linked oligosaccharides is of vital importance in the formation of glycosylated proteins in eukaryotes and is mediated by the dolichol pathway. As part of studies to allow manipulation of this pathway, the gene coding for the production of the enzyme UDP N-acetylglucosamine: dolichol phosphate N-acetylglucosaminylphosphoryl transferase (GPT), catalysing the first step in the assembly of dolichol-linked oligosaccharides, was cloned from the filamentous fungus Aspergillus niger. Degenerate-PCR was used to amplify a 470-bp fragment of the gene, which was labelled as a probe to obtain a full-length clone from a genomic library of A. niger. This contained a 1557-bp open reading frame encoding a highly hydrophobic protein of 468 amino acids with a predicted molecular weight of 51.4 kDa. The gene contained two intron sequences and putative dolichol recognition sites (PDRSs) were present in the deduced amino acid sequence. Comparison with other eukaryotic GPTs revealed the A. niger GPT to share 45-47% identity with yeasts (Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe) and 41-42% identity with mammals (mouse, hamster, human). Nested-PCR of a cDNA library was used to confirm the position of an intron. A complete cDNA clone of A. niger gpt was obtained by employing a recombinant PCR approach. This was used to rescue a conditional lethal mutant of S. cerevisiae carrying a dysfunctional gpt gene by heterologous expression, confirming that the gpt genes from A. niger and S. cerevisiae are functionally equivalent.
['Amino Acid Sequence', 'Aspergillus niger/enzymology/*genetics', 'Base Sequence', 'DNA Primers', 'DNA, Complementary', '*Genes, Fungal', 'Genetic Complementation Test', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Saccharomyces cerevisiae/genetics', 'Transferases (Other Substituted Phosphate Groups)/*genetics']