Selective expression of a major allergen and cytotoxin, Asp f I, in Aspergillus fumigatus. Implications for the immunopathogenesis of Aspergillus-related diseases.
Asp f I is a major 18-kDa Aspergillus fumigatus allergen and a member of the mitogillin family of cytotoxins. The nucleotide sequence of the Asp f I gene was determined by sequencing polymerase chain reaction products amplified from A. fumigatus spore DNA. The entire 678-bp DNA includes an 81-bp leader sequence, preceding the N-terminal alanine codon, a 52-bp intron, and a 444-bp open reading frame, encoding a 149-amino acid protein (M(r) 16,899), which is 99% homologous to mitogillin from Aspergillus restrictus. A mAb-based ELISA was used to compare Asp f I levels in spores, mycelia, and culture filtrate, and to determine the kinetics of allergen production. Disrupted hyphae or spore extracts had a 1000-fold lower level of Asp f I than culture filtrate, suggesting that germination of spores and growth of the fungus are essential for allergen production. Asp f I levels in A. fumigatus and A. restrictus peaked at day 3 (0.87 to 12.1 micrograms/ml), however, the allergen was not detected in Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus niger, Aspergillus terreus, and Aspergillus nidulans cultures (< 1.5 ng/ml) on either days 3 or 8. Northern analysis confirmed that Asp f I mRNA was detected only in A. fumigatus and A. restrictus, but not in the other four Aspergillus spp. Asp f I-specific DNA was generated after polymerase chain reaction amplification of genomic mycelial DNA obtained from A. fumigatus and A. restrictus, but not from the other Aspergillus spp. The results show that Asp f I is selectively expressed in A. fumigatus, and suggest that this cytotoxin could be a specific virulence factor for A. fumigatus.
['Allergens/*analysis/biosynthesis/genetics', 'Amino Acid Sequence', 'Aspergillosis/*etiology', 'Aspergillus fumigatus/*immunology', 'Base Sequence', 'Cytotoxins/*analysis/biosynthesis/genetics', 'Humans', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'RNA, Messenger/analysis', 'Sequence Homology, Amino Acid', 'Virulence']