Transgenic smooth muscle expression of the human CysLT1 receptor induces enhanced responsiveness of murine airways to leukotriene D4.
Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) exert potent proinflammatory actions and contribute to many of the symptoms of asthma. Using a model of allergic sensitization and airway challenge with Aspergillus fumigatus (Af), we have found that Th2-type inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) to methacholine (MCh) were associated with increased LTD(4) responsiveness in mice. To explore the importance of increased CysLT signaling in airway smooth muscle function, we generated transgenic mice that overexpress the human CysLT1 receptor (hCysLT(1)R) via the alpha-actin promoter. These receptors were expressed abundantly and induced intracellular calcium mobilization in airway smooth muscle cells from transgenic mice. Force generation in tracheal ring preparations ex vivo and airway reactivity in vivo in response to LTD(4) were greatly amplified in hCysLT(1)R-overexpressing mice, indicating that the enhanced signaling induces coordinated functional changes of the intact airway smooth muscle. The increase of AHR imposed by overexpression of the hCysLT(1)R was greater in transgenic BALB/c mice than in transgenic B6 x SJL mice. In addition, sensitization- and challenge-induced increases in airway responsiveness were significantly greater in transgenic mice than that of nontransgenic mice compared with their respective nonsensitized controls. The amplified AHR in sensitized transgenic mice was not due to an enhanced airway inflammation and was not associated with similar enhancement in MCh responsiveness. These results indicate that a selective hCysLT(1)R-induced contractile mechanism synergizes with allergic AHR. We speculate that hCysLT(1)R signaling contributes to a hypercontractile state of the airway smooth muscle.
['Actins/genetics', 'Animals', 'Aspergillus fumigatus/immunology', 'Base Sequence', 'Bronchial Hyperreactivity/*physiopathology', 'DNA Primers', 'DNA Probes', 'Exons/genetics', 'Humans', 'Immunization', 'In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence', 'Leukotriene D4/*pharmacology', 'Lung/drug effects/*physiology', 'Membrane Proteins/genetics/*physiology', 'Methacholine Chloride/pharmacology', 'Mice', 'Mice, Transgenic', 'Muscle, Smooth/drug effects/*physiology', 'Promoter Regions, Genetic', 'Receptors, Leukotriene/genetics/*physiology', 'Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction']