Utilization of AFLP markers for PCR-based identification of Aspergillus carbonarius and indication of its presence in green coffee samples.
AIMS: The objective of this work was to test whether ochratoxin A (OTA) production of Aspergillus niger and A. carbonarius is linked to a certain genotype and to identify marker sequences with diagnostic value aiding identification of A. carbonarius, a fungus of major concern regarding OTA production in food and food raw materials. METHODS AND RESULTS: Aspergillus niger and A. carbonarius were isolated mainly from Brazilian coffee sources. The ability of isolates to produce OTA was tested by thin layer chromatography (TLC). Strains were genetically characterized by AFLP fingerprinting and compared with each other and with reference strains. Cluster analysis of fingerprints showed clear separation of A. niger from A. carbonarius strains. To obtain marker sequences, AFLP fragments were isolated from silver stained polyacrylamide gels, cloned and sequenced. Sequences obtained were used to develop species- specific PCR primers for the identification of A. carbonarius in pure culture and in artificially and naturally infected samples of green coffee. CONCLUSIONS: No clear correlation between genetic similarity of the strains studied and their potential to produce OTA was found. The PCR assays designed are a useful and specific tool for identification and highly sensitive detection of A. carbonarius. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The developed PCR assays allow specific and sensitive detection and identification of A. carbonarius, a fungus considered to be one of the major causative agents for OTA in coffee and grape-derived products. Assays may provide powerful tools to improve quality control and consumer safety in the food processing industry.
['Aspergillus/classification/*isolation & purification/metabolism', 'Chromatography, Thin Layer', 'Coffee/*microbiology', 'DNA Fingerprinting/methods', 'DNA, Fungal/isolation & purification', 'Food Microbiology', 'Humans', 'Mycological Typing Techniques/methods', 'Ochratoxins/biosynthesis', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods', 'Polymorphism, Genetic']