C21orf5, a new member of Dopey family involved in morphogenesis, could participate in neurological alterations and mental retardation in Down syndrome.
Availability of the human genome sequence promises important progress in the understanding of human pathologies, particularly for multifactorial diseases. Among these, Down syndrome (DS) is the most frequent genetic cause of mental retardation. A critical region of chromosome 21, the Down syndrome Chromosomal Region-1 (DCR-1), is responsible for many features of the DS phenotype including mental retardation. We studied DCR-1 C21orf5 as a new candidate gene for DS considering its restricted expression in key brain regions altered in DS patients and involved in learning and memory processes. To elucidate C21orf5 molecular function, we performed a comparative study of protein sequences in several species and showed that C21orf5 represents a new member of the Dopey leucine zipper-like family. The C21orf5 C-termini contains two highly conserved leucine-like zipper domains in invertebrate and vertebrate species. Evolution analysis indicated a common ancestral origin of these protein sequences also suggesting a conserved function of this gene throughout phylogenesis. Mutations of the known C21orf5 homologous genes Aspergillus nidulans DopA, Saccharomyces cerevisiae Dop1 and Caenorhabditis elegans pad1, determine morphological abnormalities. We studied transgenic mice carrying the human C21orf5 gene and we showed that this gene is overexpressed in brain regions by in situ hybridization and by real-time RT-PCR experiments. Interestingly, we also showed that these transgenic mice have an increased density of cortical cells overexpressing C21orf5. Similarly, DS patients have an altered lamination pattern in their cortex. Considering together our and previous findings, we suggest that the human dopey family member, C21orf5, could play a role in brain morphogenesis and, when overexpressed, it could participate in neurological features and mental retardation observed in DS patients.
['Amino Acid Sequence', 'Animals', 'Brain/metabolism', 'Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21/genetics/metabolism', 'Down Syndrome/*genetics/metabolism', 'Humans', 'Mice', 'Mice, Transgenic', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Morphogenesis', 'Phylogeny', 'Sequence Homology, Amino Acid', 'Vesicular Transport Proteins/*genetics/metabolism']