Functional analyses of heterotrimeric G protein G alpha and G beta subunits in Gibberella zeae.
The homothallic ascomycete fungus Gibberella zeae (anamorph: Fusarium graminearum) is a major toxigenic plant pathogen that causes head blight disease on small-grain cereals. The fungus produces the mycotoxins deoxynivalenol (DON) and zearalenone (ZEA) in infected hosts, posing a threat to human and animal health. Despite its agricultural and toxicological importance, the molecular mechanisms underlying its growth, development and virulence remain largely unknown. To better understand such mechanisms, we studied the heterotrimeric G proteins of G. zeae, which are known to control crucial signalling pathways that regulate various cellular and developmental responses in fungi. Three putative Galpha subunits, GzGPA1, GzGPA2 and GzGPA3, and one Gbeta subunit, GzGPB1, were identified in the F. graminearum genome. Deletion of GzGPA1, a homologue of the Aspergillus nidulans Galpha gene fadA, resulted in female sterility and enhanced DON and ZEA production, suggesting that GzGPA1 is required for normal sexual reproduction and repression of toxin biosynthesis. The production of DON and ZEA was also enhanced in the GzGPB1 mutant, suggesting that both Galpha GzGPA1 and Gbeta GzGPB1 negatively control mycotoxin production. Deletion of GzGPA2, which encodes a Galpha protein similar to A. nidulans GanB, caused reduced pathogenicity and increased chitin accumulation in the cell wall, implying that GzGPA2 has multiple functions. Our study shows that G. zeae heterotrimeric G protein subunits can regulate vegetative growth, sexual development, toxin production and pathogenicity.
['Cell Wall/metabolism', 'Chitin/metabolism', 'Conserved Sequence', 'GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits/genetics/*metabolism', 'GTP-Binding Protein beta Subunits/genetics/*metabolism', 'Gene Expression Regulation, Fungal', 'Gene Targeting', 'Gibberella/*growth & development/*metabolism/pathogenicity', 'Hordeum/microbiology', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Mycotoxins/biosynthesis', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Sequence Analysis', 'Sequence Deletion', 'Signal Transduction/genetics', 'Transformation, Bacterial']