Evolutionary history of the ancient cutinase family in five filamentous Ascomycetes reveals differential gene duplications and losses and in Magnaporthe grisea shows evidence of sub- and neo-functionalization.
* The cuticle is the first barrier for fungi that parasitize plants systematically or opportunistically. Here, the evolutionary history is reported of the multimembered cutinase families of the plant pathogenic Ascomycetes Magnaporthe grisea, Fusarium graminearum and Botrytis cinerea and the saprotrophic Ascomycetes Aspergillus nidulans and Neurospora crassa. * Molecular taxonomy of all fungal cutinases demonstrates a clear division into two ancient subfamilies. No evidence was found for lateral gene transfer from prokaryotes. The cutinases in the five Ascomycetes show significant copy number variation, they form six clades and their extreme sequence diversity is highlighted by the lack of consensus intron. The average ratio of gene duplication to loss is 2 : 3, with the exception of M. grisea and N. crassa, which exhibit extreme family expansion and contraction, respectively. * Detailed transcript profiling in vivo, categorizes the M. grisea cutinases into four regulatory patterns. Symmetric or asymmetric expression profiles of phylogenetically related cutinase genes suggest subfunctionalization and neofunctionalization, respectively. * The cutinase family-size per fungal species is discussed in relation to genome characteristics and lifestyle. The ancestry of the cutinase gene family, together with the expression divergence of its individual members provides a first insight into the drivers for niche differentiation in fungi.
['Ascomycota/*genetics/pathogenicity', 'Base Composition', 'Carboxylic Ester Hydrolases/classification/*genetics', 'Evolution, Molecular', 'Exons', '*Gene Duplication', 'Gene Expression Profiling', 'Genes, Fungal', 'Introns', 'Magnaporthe/*genetics/pathogenicity', 'Multigene Family', 'Phylogeny', 'Plant Diseases', 'Plant Structures', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Sequence Alignment', 'Sequence Analysis, Protein']