Facing the problem of "false positives": re-assessment and improvement of a multiplex RT-PCR procedure for the diagnosis of A. flavus mycotoxin producers.
The aim of our research project was to consolidate a multiplex RT-PCR protocol to detect aflatoxigenic strains of Aspergillus flavus. Several independent A. flavus strains were isolated from corn and flour samples from the North of Italy and from three European countries. Aflatoxin producing/not producing phenotype was assessed by qualitative and quantitative assays at day five of growth in aflatoxin inducing conditions. Expression of 16 genes belonging to the aflatoxin cluster was assayed by multiplex or monomeric RT-PCR. There is a good correlation between gene expression and aflatoxin production. Strains that apparently transcribed all the relevant genes but did not release aflatoxin in the medium ("false positives") were re-assessed for mycotoxin production after extended growth in inducing condition. All the "false positive" strains in actual fact were positive when aflatoxin determination was performed after 10 days of growth. These strains should then be re-classified as "slow aflatoxin accumulators". To optimise the diagnostic procedure, a quintuplex RT-PCR procedure was designed consisting of a primer set directed against four informative aflatoxin cluster genes and the beta-tubulin gene as an internal amplification control. In conclusion we have provided evidence for the robustness and reliability of our RT-PCR protocol in discriminating mycotoxin producer from non-producer strains of A. flavus. and the molecular procedure we devised is a promising tool with which to screen and control the endemic population of A. flavus colonising different areas of the World.
['Aspergillus flavus/classification/genetics/*metabolism', 'False Positive Reactions', 'Gene Expression Regulation, Fungal/physiology', 'Genes, Fungal', 'Mycotoxins/*biosynthesis', 'RNA, Fungal', 'Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction/*methods']