Functional expression and sub-cellular localization of the early aflatoxin pathway enzyme Nor-1 in Aspergillus parasiticus.
Aflatoxin biosynthesis in Aspergillus parasiticus requires at least 17 enzyme activities (from acetate). Although the activities of most aflatoxin biosynthetic enzymes have been established, the mechanisms that govern transport and sub-cellular localization of these enzymes are not clear. We developed plasmid constructs that express Nor-1 fused to a green fluorescent protein reporter (EGFP) to monitor transport and localization of this early pathway enzyme in real time in Aspergillus parasiticus. Plasmids expressing EGFP fused to Nor-1 were introduced into A. parasiticus B62 (carries non-functional Nor-1). Transformants were screened for increased aflatoxin accumulation (restored Nor-1 activity) on coconut agar medium and for EGFP expression using fluorescence microscopy. Increased aflatoxin accumulation was confirmed by TLC and ELISA. Nor-1 fused to EGFP at either the N- or C- terminus functionally complemented non-functional Nor-1 in B62 and increased aflatoxin synthesis to wild-type (N-terminus) or lower levels (C-terminus). We detected full-length Nor-1 fusion proteins in transformants with increased aflatoxin accumulation (Western blot) and determined that the expression plasmid integrated at the nor-1 locus in these cells (Southern blot). Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) demonstrated that Nor-1 fusion proteins localized in the cytoplasm and vacuoles of fungal hyphae grown on aflatoxin-inducing solid media for 48h; control EGFP (no Nor-1) did not localize to vacuoles until 72h. The highest rate of aflatoxin synthesis coincided with the highest rate of transport of Nor-1 fusion proteins to the vacuole strongly suggesting that Nor-1 is synthesized in the cytoplasm and transported to the vacuole to carry out an early step in aflatoxin synthesis.
['Alcohol Oxidoreductases/genetics/*metabolism', 'Aspergillus/*enzymology/genetics', 'Blotting, Southern', 'Blotting, Western', 'Cytoplasm/*enzymology/genetics', 'Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay', 'Fungal Proteins/genetics/*metabolism', 'Green Fluorescent Proteins/genetics/metabolism', 'Microscopy, Confocal', 'NAD (+) and NADP (+) Dependent Alcohol Oxidoreductases', 'Plasmids', 'Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Subcellular Fractions/*enzymology', 'Vacuoles/*enzymology/genetics']