nirA, the pathway-specific regulatory gene of nitrate assimilation in Aspergillus nidulans, encodes a putative GAL4-type zinc finger protein and contains four introns in highly conserved regions.
The nucleotide sequence of nirA, mediating nitrate induction in Aspergillus nidulans, has been determined. Alignment of the cDNA and the genomic DNA sequence indicates that the gene contains four introns and encodes a protein of 892 amino acids. The deduced NIRA protein displays all characteristics of a transcriptional activator. A putative double-stranded DNA-binding domain in the amino-terminal part comprises six cysteine residues, characteristic for the GAL4 family of zinc finger proteins. An amino-terminal highly acidic region and two proline-rich regions are also present. The nucleotide sequences of two mutations were determined after they were mapped by transformation with overlapping DNA fragments, amplified by the polymerase chain reaction. nirA87, a mutation conferring noninducibility by nitrate and nitrite, has a -1 frameshift at triplet 340, which eliminates 549 C-terminal amino acids from the polypeptide. Under the assumption that the truncated polypeptide is stable, it comprises the zinc finger domain and the acidic region, which seem not sufficient for transcriptional activation. nirAd-106, an allele conferring nitrogen metabolite derepression of nitrate and nitrite reductase activity, includes two transitions, changing a glutamic acid to a lysine and a valine to an alanine, situated between a basic and a proline-rich region of the protein. Northern (RNA) analysis of the wild type and of constitutive (nirAc) and derepressed (nirAd) mutants show that the nirA transcript does not vary between these strains, being in all cases constitutively expressed. On the other hand, transcript levels of structural genes (niaD and niiA) do vary, being highly inducible in the wild type but constitutively expressed in the nirAc mutant. The nirAd mutant appears phenotypically derepressed, because the niaD and niiA transcript levels are overinduced in the presence of nitrate but are still partially repressed in the presence of ammonium.
['Amino Acid Sequence', 'Aspergillus nidulans/*genetics/metabolism', 'Base Sequence', 'DNA, Fungal/genetics/isolation & purification', 'DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics', 'Fungal Proteins/*genetics', '*Genes, Fungal', '*Genes, Regulator', '*Introns', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Mutagenesis', 'Plasmids', 'RNA, Fungal/genetics/isolation & purification', 'Restriction Mapping', '*Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins', 'Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid', '*Trans-Activators', '*Transcription Factors', 'Transcription, Genetic', 'Zinc Fingers/*genetics']