Microbial content of house dust samples determined with qPCR.
This study was designed to produce information about microbial concentrations using qPCR and their variation in different seasons and home environments with analyses of two types of house dust samples. Also the correlations between the two types of samples and the reproducibility of the parallel subsamples were studied. Two types of vacuumed house dust samples, rug dust and vacuum cleaner bag dust, were collected in 5 normal urban homes in four different seasons (N=20+20). From all dust samples, five parallel subsamples were subjected to qPCR analyses of 17 microbial species or assay groups of microbes. The highest fungal concentrations were found for the Penicillium/Aspergillus/Paecilomyces variotii group, and for the species Aspergillus penicillioides, Aureobasidium pullulans, Cladosporium cladosporioides and Cladosporium herbarum. These species/groups were present in almost all samples. The two types of dust samples gave similar results for most microbial species or groups analyzed, but in general, concentrations were slightly higher in rug dust than in dust from vacuum cleaner bag. Microbial concentrations varied significantly between different seasons and hence the similarity of samples within home was mainly low. The concentrations varied significantly also between different home environments. The reproducibility of the parallel subsamples was good or moderate for most of the analyzed species or assay groups. However, further studies are needed to fully understand the factors causing variation in these methods. Nevertheless, in order to show actual differences in fungal concentrations between urban homes with no known microbial sources, all dust samples to be compared should be taken during the same season.
['Air Microbiology/*standards', 'Air Pollution, Indoor/*analysis', 'DNA, Fungal/analysis', 'Dust/*analysis', 'Fungi/genetics/*isolation & purification', 'Housing/*standards', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Reproducibility of Results', 'Seasons']