Heterologous expression and characterization of CpI, OcpA, and novel serine-type carboxypeptidase OcpB from Aspergillus oryzae.
In the genome of Aspergillus oryzae, 12 genes have been predicted to encode serine-type carboxypeptidases. However, the carboxypeptidase activities of the proteins encoded by these genes have not yet been confirmed experimentally. In this study, we have constructed three of these 12 genes overexpressing strains using Aspergillus nidulans and characterized their overproduced recombinant proteins. Of these three genes, one was previously named cpI; the other two have not been reported yet, and hence, we named them ocpA and ocpB. The recombinant proteins released amino acid residues from the C terminus of peptides, and the activity of the enzymes was inhibited by phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, indicating the enzymes to be serine-type carboxypeptidases. Recombinant OcpA, OcpB, and CpI were stable at 45 degrees C, 55 degrees C, and 55 degrees C, respectively, at a low pH. The enzymatic properties of recombinant OcpB were different from those of any reported serine-type carboxypeptidase. On the other hand, recombinant OcpA had similar enzymatic properties to A. oryzae carboxypeptidases O1 and O2. The DNA and N-terminal amino acid sequences of carboxypeptidases O1 and O2 from A. oryzae IAM2640 were similar to those of OcpA. Result of transcriptional analysis of ocpA, ocpB, and cpI suggest differences in transcriptional regulation between these genes.
['Amino Acid Sequence', 'Aspergillus oryzae/*enzymology/genetics', 'Base Sequence', 'Carboxypeptidases/chemistry/drug effects/*genetics/metabolism', 'DNA Primers', 'Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology', 'Enzyme Stability', 'Genetic Vectors', 'Genome-Wide Association Study', 'Kinetics', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Phenylmethylsulfonyl Fluoride/pharmacology', 'Plasmids', 'Recombinant Proteins/chemistry/metabolism', 'Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Sequence Alignment', 'Sequence Homology, Amino Acid']