Gamma radiation induced mutagenesis in Aspergillus niger to enhance its microbial fermentation activity for industrial enzyme production.
alpha- and beta-Galactosidases find application in food processing, health and nutrition. Aspergillus niger is one of the potent producer of these enzymes and was genotypically improved using gamma-ray induced mutagenesis. The mutant-derivative produced two-fold higher alpha- and beta-galactosidases. For testing genetic variability and its relationship with phenotypic properties of the two organisms, DNA samples of the mutant and parental strains of A. niger were amplified with 28 deca-nucleotide synthetic primers. RAPD analysis showed significantly different pattern between parental and mutant cultures. The mutant derivative yielded homogeneous while parental strain formed heterogeneous amplification patterns. Seven primers identified 42.9% polymorphism in the amplification products, indicating that these primers determined some genetic variability between the two strains. Thus RAPD was found to be an efficient technique to determine genetic variability in the mutant and wild organisms. Both wild and mutant strains were analyzed for their potential to produce galactosidases. Comparison of different carbon sources on enzyme yield revealed that wheat bran is significant (P < 0.01) effective producer and economical source followed by rice bran, rice polishing and lactose. The mutant was significantly better enzyme producer and could be considered for its prospective application in food, nutrition and health and that RAPD can be effectively used to differentiate mutant strain from the parental strain based on the RAPD patterns.
['Aspergillus niger/*genetics', 'Culture Media', 'DNA/genetics/metabolism', 'Fermentation', 'Galactosidases/metabolism', 'Gamma Rays', 'Genetic Variation', 'Industrial Microbiology/*methods', 'Kinetics', '*Mutagenesis', 'Mutagenesis, Site-Directed', 'Mutation', 'Polymorphism, Genetic', 'Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA Technique/methods', 'Thermodynamics']