[Expression of integrin during the course of adhesion between fungi and corneal epithelial cells].
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of integrin during the course of adhesion between fungi and corneal epithelial cells. METHODS: It was an experimental study. Human corneal epithelial cells were cultured and the adhesion model were established between human corneal epithelial cells and Fusarium solani (CGMCC 3.1829) or Aspergillus fumigatus (CGMCC 3.0772) in vitro. Human corneal epithelial cells were incubated with Fusarium solani or Aspergillus fumigatus at 37 degrees C and the non-adhered fungi were washed out with sterile phosphate buffered solution (PBS). The total RNA was extract from the human corneal epithelial cells. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for the expression of integrin was performed. RESULTS: The results of RT-PCR showed that during the course of adhesion between Aspergillus fumigatus and corneal epithelial cells, the expression of integrin alpha L (ITGAL), integrin alpha M (ITGAM), integrin alpha X (ITGAX) and integrin beta 2 (ITGB2) were upregulated significantly. However, during the course of adhesion between Fusarium solani and corneal epithelial cells, there was no significant differences in the expression of those 14 kinds of integrin. CONCLUSIONS: Integrin alphaLbeta2, alphaMbeta2 and alphaXbeta2 are all belong to the leukocyte adhesion receptor group (beta2 group) in integrin family. These three members are all involved in the adhesion of Aspergillus fumigatus and corneal epithelial cells. With the adhesion, the expression of integrin is upregulated. These results suggest that the integrin-mediated adhesion is different with different kinds of fungi. Integrin plays an important role in adhesion of fungi with human corneal epithelial cells.
['Aspergillus fumigatus/*pathogenicity', 'Cell Adhesion', 'Cells, Cultured', 'Epithelial Cells', 'Epithelium, Corneal/*metabolism', 'Fusarium/*pathogenicity', '*Host-Pathogen Interactions', 'Humans', 'Integrins/*metabolism']