Gene knockdown by ihpRNA-triggering in the ectomycorrhizal basidiomycete fungus Laccaria bicolor.
Ectomycorrhiza (ECM) is a mutualistic association between fungi and the roots of the vast majority of trees. These include numerous ecologically and economically relevant species and the participating fungal symbionts are predominantly filamentous basidiomycetes. In natural ecosystems the plant nutrient uptake from soil takes place via the extraradical mycelia of these ECM mycosimbionts as a trade for plant photosyntates. The symbiotic phase in the life cycle of ECM basidiomycetes is the dikaryotic hyphae. Therefore, studies on symbiotic relevant gene functions require the inactivation of both gene copies in these dikaryotic fungi. RNA silencing is a eukaryotic sequence homology-dependent degradation of target RNAs which is believed to have evolved as a protection mechanism against invading nucleic acids. In different eukaryotic organisms, including fungi, the RNA silencing pathway can be artificially triggered to target and degrade gene transcripts of interest, resulting in gene knock-down. Most importantly, RNA silencing can act at the cytosolic level affecting mRNAs originating from several gene copies and different nuclei thus offering an efficient means of altering gene expression in dikaryotic organisms. Therefore, the pHg/pSILBAgamma silencing vector was constructed for efficient RNA silencing triggering in the model mycorrhizal fungus Laccaria bicolor. This cloning vector carries the Agaricus bisporus gpdII-promoter, two multiple cloning sites separated by a L. bicolor nitrate reductase intron and the Aspergillus nidulans trpC terminator. pSILBAgamma allows an easy two-step PCR-cloning of hairpin sequences to be expressed in basidiomycetes. With one further cloning step into pHg, a pCAMBIA1300-based binary vector carrying a hygromycin resistance cassette, makes the pHg/pSILBAgamma plasmid compatible with Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. The pHg/pSILBAgamma-system results in predominantly single integrations of RNA silencing triggering T-DNAs in the fungal genome and the integration sites of the transgenes can be resolved by plasmid rescue. Besides the optimized use in L. bicolor, general consideration was taken to build a vector system with maximum compatibility with other homobasidiomycetes and different transformation techniques.
['Agrobacterium/genetics/metabolism', 'Fungal Proteins/genetics/metabolism', 'Gene Knockdown Techniques/instrumentation/*methods', 'Genetic Vectors/genetics/metabolism', 'Inverted Repeat Sequences', 'Laccaria/*genetics/physiology', 'Mycorrhizae/*genetics/physiology', 'Nitrate Reductases/genetics/metabolism', '*RNA Interference', 'RNA, Small Interfering/chemistry/*genetics', 'Symbiosis', 'Transformation, Genetic', 'Trees/microbiology/physiology']