Environmental and clinical epidemiology of Aspergillus terreus: data from a prospective surveillance study.
Aspergillus terreus may be resistant to amphotericin B and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised patients. Local incidence is influenced by the density of airborne Aspergillus spp. spores which may in turn depend on meteorological factors. Once-weekly environmental samples were collected prospectively inside and outside the University Hospital of Cologne, Germany (UHC) and haematological patients were screened for nasal Aspergillus spp. colonisation and monitored for invasive fungal disease (IFD). RAPD (rapid amplification of polymorphic DNA)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and amphotericin B susceptibility testing were performed on all A. terreus isolates. A total of 4919 colony-forming units (cfu) were isolated (2212 indoors, 2707 outdoors). Further identification revealed A. fumigatus (73.5%), A. niger (4.3%), A. flavus (1.7%), A. terreus (0.2%) and non-Aspergillus fungi (20.3%). RAPD-PCR did not reveal clonal relationships between the A. terreus isolates. All A. terreus isolates displayed complete resistance to amphotericin. The B. Aspergillus spp. conidia exposure was lowest in June and highest in November inside and outside UHC. Conidia load correlated with the season and the relative humidity, with increasing spore counts during dry periods. One out of 855 nasal swabs was positive for A. niger. The patient did not develop IFD. A. terreus is unlikely to be a relevant pathogen at the UHC. Results from RAPD-PCR suggested a wide epidemiological variety of strains rather than a common source of contamination. Nasal swab surveillance cultures for early detection of Aspergillus spp. colonisation were not useful in identifying patients who may develop IFD. The risk of IFD at the UHC may increase in autumn and during dry periods.
['Adult', 'Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Amphotericin B/pharmacology', 'Antifungal Agents/pharmacology', 'Aspergillosis/*epidemiology/*microbiology', 'Aspergillus/classification/*isolation & purification', 'Carrier State/epidemiology/microbiology', 'Cluster Analysis', 'Drug Resistance, Fungal', '*Environmental Microbiology', 'Female', 'Genotype', 'Germany/epidemiology', 'Hematologic Neoplasms/complications', 'Hospitals', 'Humans', 'Incidence', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Molecular Typing', 'Mycological Typing Techniques', 'Nasal Mucosa/microbiology', 'Prospective Studies', 'Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA Technique', 'Seasons']