Disclosing a crypt: microbial diversity and degradation activity of the microflora isolated from funeral clothes of Cardinal Peter Pazmany.
A crypt can be considered as a particular environment where different microbial communities contribute to decomposition of organic materials present inside during a long interval of time. The textile remains of the funeral clothes (biretta and tunic) of Cardinal Pazmany, an important historic figure dead in Bratislava the 19th March 1637, conserved in this kind of environment were subjected to microbial investigation. The sampling comprised three different approaches and the use of various kinds of cultivation media. Two different PCR-based clustering methods, f-ITS and f-CBH, were employed in order to select the bacterial and fungal microfloras which were identified in a second step by the 16S rRNA and ITS sequencing respectively. The isolated microflora was tested for its proteolytic, keratinolytic and cellulolytic activities and for its ability to grow on Fibroin agar medium. The combination of cultural, molecular and biodegradative assays was able to isolate and characterize a bacterial community composed mainly by members of the phyla Firmicutes and Actinobacteria. The fungal community appeared more diversified, together with several Penicillium and Aspergillus strains, members belonging to the species Beauveria bassiana, Eurotium cristatum, Xenochalara juniperi, Phialosimplex caninus and Myriodontium keratinophilum were isolated. Bacteria, especially the Bacillus members, showed their strong ability to degrade keratin and gelatin and a large portion of them was able to growth on Fibroin agar. The fungal isolates displayed a widespread cellulolytic activity and fibroin utilization, although they possessed a weaker and slower proteolytic and keratinolytic properties respect to bacterial counterpart. The present study can be considered perhaps as the first or among the few microbial investigations which treated the textile biodegradation from such unusual environment.
['Bacteria/*classification/*isolation & purification', '*Biota', 'DNA, Bacterial/chemistry/genetics', 'DNA, Fungal/chemistry/genetics', 'DNA, Ribosomal/chemistry/genetics', 'DNA, Ribosomal Spacer/chemistry/genetics', '*Fossils', 'Fungi/*classification/*isolation & purification', 'Humans', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'RNA, Ribosomal, 16S/genetics', 'Sequence Analysis, DNA', 'Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid', 'Textiles/*microbiology']