Frequency, diagnosis and management of fungal respiratory infections.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review highlights key recent advances in fungal respiratory infections, encompassing developments in epidemiology, diagnostics and management, focussing on Aspergillus, Pneumocystis and Cryptococcus as key pathogens. RECENT FINDINGS: Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis complicates existing lung diseases, particularly those associated with cavities or bullae, with a high global disease burden (prevalence estimate >1.1 million following tuberculosis) and significant under diagnosis (using Aspergillus IgG antibody). Several new treatment studies have been published (using caspofungin and voriconazole). Pneumocystis jirovecii demonstrates airborne transmission between infected and noninfected individuals necessitating isolation, and possibly identifying colonized patients. Early detection of serum cryptococcal antigenaemia in HIV may prevent development of meningitis, reducing morbidity and mortality, and routine testing of serum in community-acquired pneumonia cases in high endemicity areas may be helpful. Respiratory Aspergillus antigen and PCR testing is more sensitive than culture or serum testing. A new lateral flow antigen testing device may provide rapid bedside diagnosis of aspergillosis. Azole resistance to Aspergillus fumigatus is increasing across Europe. SUMMARY: The field of fungal respiratory infection continues to evolve and develop, with many recent key advances. Patients, and possibly colonized patients, with Pneumocystis require isolation in hospitals and preferably segregation in outpatients. Challenges remain in almost all areas, with further work needed to identify the true burden of Aspergillus disease and address the increasing problem of azole resistance.
['Antifungal Agents/*therapeutic use', 'Antigens, Fungal/analysis', 'Azoles/therapeutic use', 'Cryptococcosis/diagnosis/drug therapy/epidemiology', 'Drug Resistance', 'Humans', 'Lung Diseases, Fungal/*diagnosis/drug therapy/epidemiology', 'Pneumonia, Pneumocystis/diagnosis/drug therapy/epidemiology', 'Pulmonary Aspergillosis/diagnosis/drug therapy/epidemiology', 'Respiratory Tract Infections/*diagnosis/drug therapy']