Multicenter comparison of serum and whole-blood specimens for detection of Aspergillus DNA in high-risk hematological patients.
Samples from patients at high risk for invasive aspergillosis (IA) were prospectively collected and analyzed for the presence of molecular markers of fungal infection. Serum specimens were screened for galactomannan and Aspergillus DNA, and whole-blood specimens were screened only for Aspergillus DNA. Fungal infections were categorized according to the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Invasive Fungal Infections Cooperative Group, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group (EORTC/MSG) criteria. Forty-seven cases (proven and probable IA) and 31 controls (no evidence of IA) were selected retrospectively for this case-control study, comprising 803 samples, in order to determine the performance of whole-blood PCR, serum PCR, and serum galactomannan testing. Although no single assay was able to detect every case of IA, a combination of different assays provided the best performance. There was no significant difference between the use of whole-blood and serum specimens for PCR-based diagnosis of IA, but there was a trend for whole blood to be more sensitive (85% versus 79%) and to yield an earlier positive result (36 days versus 15 days) than for serum. However, DNA extraction from serum specimens is easier and faster than that from whole-blood specimens, and it allows the same specimen to be used for both galactomannan and PCR assays. In conclusion, the appropriate sample type for DNA extraction should be determined by the local requirements and the technical platforms available at each individual center. A combination of biomarker tests offered the best diagnostic utility for detecting IA.
['Adolescent', 'Adult', 'Aged', 'Aspergillosis/*diagnosis', 'Aspergillus/*genetics/*isolation & purification', 'Biomarkers/blood', 'Case-Control Studies', 'DNA, Fungal/*blood', 'Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Male', 'Mannans/*blood', 'Middle Aged', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Young Adult']