Metabolic detoxification pathways for 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin in primary tracheal epithelial cells.
1. The health effects of inhaled mycotoxins remain poorly documented despite their presence in bioaerosols. 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin is produced in association with sterigmatocystin by some Aspergillus spp., sometimes in larger amounts than sterigmatocystin. Whereas sterigmatocystin can be metabolized through cytochromes P450 (CYP), UDP-glucuronosyltransferases and sulfotransferases in airway epithelial cells, little is known about 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin. 2. The 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin metabolites were analyzed using human recombinant CYP and porcine tracheal epithelial cell (PTEC) primary cultures at an air-liquid interface. The induction of xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes was examined by real-time quantitative PCR for mRNA expression and 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation activity. 3. CYP1A1 metabolized 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin into hydroxy-nor-methoxy-sterigmatocystin, nor-methoxy-sterigmatocystin and dihydroxy-methoxy-sterigmatocystin. CYP1A2 led to monohydroxy-methoxy-sterigmatocystin. In PTEC, 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin metabolism resulted into a glucuroconjugate of 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin, a sulfoconjugate and a glucuroconjugate of monohydroxy-methoxy-sterigmatocystin. The exposure of PTEC for 24 h to 1 microM 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin induced a significant increase in the mRNA levels of CYP1A1, without significant induction of the 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation activity. 4. These data suggest that 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin is mainly detoxified in airway cells through conjugation, as sterigmatocystin. However, while CYP produced a reactive metabolite of sterigmatocystin, no such metabolite was detected with 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin. Nevertheless, 5-methoxy-sterigmatocystin increases the CYP1A1 mRNA levels. The long-term consequences remain unknown.
['Animals', 'Biotransformation', 'Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid', 'Cytochrome P-450 CYP1A1/*metabolism', 'Epithelial Cells/*metabolism', 'Humans', 'Metabolic Networks and Pathways/*physiology', 'Molecular Structure', 'Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Sterigmatocystin/*analogs & derivatives/chemistry/metabolism/toxicity', 'Swine', 'Tandem Mass Spectrometry', 'Trachea/*cytology']