Studies on drug metabolism by fungi colonizing decomposing human cadavers. Part I: DNA sequence-based identification of fungi isolated from postmortem material.
Cadavers can be colonized by a wide variety of bacteria and fungi. Some of these microbes could change the concentration or the metabolic pattern of drugs present in postmortem samples. The purpose of this study was to identify fungi from human postmortem material and to further assess their potential role in the metabolism of drugs. Aliquots of 252 postmortem samples (heart blood, liver, kidney, and lung) taken from 105 moderately to severely decomposed bodies were streaked on Sabouraud agar for isolation of fungal species. One part of the samples was worked up immediately after autopsy (group I). The second part had previously been stored at -20 degrees C for at least 1 year (group II). Identification of the isolates was achieved morphologically by microscopy and molecularly by polymerase chain reaction amplification and sequencing of markers allowing species identification of the respective genera. Depending on the genus, different gene fragments were used: calmodulin for Aspergillus, beta-tubulin for Penicillium, translation elongation factor 1alpha for Fusarium, and the internal transcribed spacer region of the ribosomal DNA for all remaining genera. A total of 156 fungal strains were isolated from 62% of the postmortem materials. By using these primers, 98% of the isolates could be identified to the species level. The most common genera were Candida (60.0%-six species), Penicillium (10.3%-two species), Rhodotorula (7.1%-one species), Mucor (6.4%-four species), Aspergillus (3.2%-four species), Trichosporon (3.2%-one species), and Geotrichum (3.2%-one species). Group I samples contained 53% more fungal species than stored samples suggesting some fungi did not survive the freezing process. The isolated fungi might be characteristic for decomposed bodies. The proposed methodology proved to be appropriate for the identification of fungi in this type of material.
['Adult', 'Aged', 'Autopsy', 'Base Sequence', 'Cadaver', 'DNA, Fungal/genetics/*isolation & purification', 'Female', 'Fungi/genetics/*isolation & purification', 'Humans', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Pharmaceutical Preparations/*metabolism', 'Sequence Analysis, DNA']