Impact of in vivo triazole and echinocandin combination therapy for invasive pulmonary aspergillosis: enhanced efficacy against Cyp51 mutant isolates.
Previous studies examining combination therapy for invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) have revealed conflicting results, including antagonism, indifference, and enhanced effects. The most commonly employed combination for this infection includes a mold-active triazole and echinocandin. Few studies have evaluated combination therapy from a pharmacodynamic (PD) perspective, and even fewer have examined combination therapy against both wild-type and azole-resistant Cyp51 mutant isolates. The current studies aim to fill this gap in knowledge. Four Aspergillus fumigatus isolates were utilized, including a wild-type strain, an Fks1 mutant (posaconazole susceptible and caspofungin resistant), and two Cyp51 mutants (posaconazole resistant). A neutropenic murine model of IPA was used for the treatment studies. The dosing design included monotherapy with posaconazole, monotherapy with caspofungin, and combination therapy with both. Efficacy was determined using quantitative PCR, and results were normalized to known quantities of conidia (conidial equivalents [CE]). The static dose, 1-log kill dose, and associated PD target area under the curve (AUC)/MIC ratio were determined for monotherapy and combination therapy. Monotherapy experiments revealed potent activity for posaconazole, with reductions of 3 to 4 log10 Aspergillus CE/ml with the two "low"-MIC isolates. Posaconazole alone was less effective for the two isolates with higher MICs. Caspofungin monotherapy did not produce a significant decrease in fungal burden for any strain. Combination therapy with the two antifungals did not enhance efficacy for the two posaconazole-susceptible isolates. However, the drug combination produced synergistic activity against both posaconazole-resistant isolates. Specifically, the combination resulted in a 1- to 2-log10 decline in burden that would not have been predicted based on the monotherapy results for each drug. This corresponded to a reduction in the free-drug posaconazole AUC/MIC ratio needed for stasis of up to 17-fold. The data suggest that combination therapy using a triazole and an echinocandin may be a beneficial treatment strategy for triazole-resistant isolates.
['Animals', 'Antifungal Agents/pharmacokinetics/*pharmacology', 'Area Under Curve', 'Aspergillus fumigatus/*drug effects/growth & development/isolation & purification', 'Dose-Response Relationship, Drug', 'Drug Resistance, Fungal/drug effects', 'Drug Synergism', 'Drug Therapy, Combination', 'Echinocandins/pharmacokinetics/*pharmacology', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis/*drug therapy/microbiology', 'Lipopeptides', 'Mice', 'Microbial Sensitivity Tests', 'Spores, Fungal/*drug effects/growth & development', 'Triazoles/pharmacokinetics/*pharmacology']