Fungal contamination in two Portuguese wastewater treatment plants.
The presence of filamentous fungi was detected in wastewater and air collected at wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) from several European countries. The aim of the present study was to assess fungal contamination in two WWTP operating in Lisbon. In addition, particulate matter (PM) contamination data was analyzed. To apply conventional methods, air samples from the two plants were collected through impaction using an air sampler with a velocity air rate of 140 L/min. Surfaces samples were collected by swabbing the surfaces of the same indoor sites. All collected samples were incubated at 27 degrees C for 5 to 7 d. After lab processing and incubation of collected samples, quantitative and qualitative results were obtained with identification of the isolated fungal species. For molecular methods, air samples of 250 L were also collected using the impinger method at 300 L/min airflow rate. Samples were collected into 10 ml sterile phosphate-buffered saline with 0.05% Triton X-100, and the collection liquid was subsequently used for DNA extraction. Molecular identification of Aspergillus fumigatus and Stachybotrys chartarum was achieved by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using the Rotor-Gene 6000 qPCR Detection System (Corbett). Assessment of PM was also conducted with portable direct-reading equipment (Lighthouse, model 3016 IAQ). Particles concentration measurement was performed at five different sizes: PM0.5, PM1, PM2.5, PM5, and PM10. Sixteen different fungal species were detected in indoor air in a total of 5400 isolates in both plants. Penicillium sp. was the most frequently isolated fungal genus (58.9%), followed by Aspergillus sp. (21.2%) and Acremonium sp. (8.2%), in the total underground area. In a partially underground plant, Penicillium sp. (39.5%) was also the most frequently isolated, also followed by Aspergillus sp. (38.7%) and Acremonium sp. (9.7%). Using RT-PCR, only A. fumigatus was detected in air samples collected, and only from partial underground plant. Stachybotrys chartarum was not detected in any of the samples analyzed. The distribution of particle sizes showed the same tendency in both plants; however, the partially underground plant presented higher levels of contamination, except for PM2.5. Fungal contamination assessment is crucial to evaluating the potential health risks to exposed workers in these settings. In order to achieve an evaluation of potential health risks to exposed workers, it is essential to combine conventional and molecular methods for fungal detection. Protective measures to minimize worker exposure to fungi need to be adopted since wastewater is the predominant internal fungal source in this setting.
['Air Pollutants, Occupational/analysis/*isolation & purification', 'Air Pollution, Indoor/analysis/*statistics & numerical data', 'Colony Count, Microbial', 'DNA, Fungal/analysis', 'Environmental Monitoring/methods', 'Fomites/*microbiology', 'Humans', 'Mitosporic Fungi/genetics/*isolation & purification', 'Occupational Exposure/analysis/*statistics & numerical data', 'Particle Size', 'Particulate Matter/analysis', 'Portugal', 'Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Risk Assessment', '*Water Purification']