Development of cycling probe-based real-time PCR system to detect Fusarium species and Fusarium solani species complex (FSSC).
In the present study, we developed a new real-time PCR system based on the cycling probe technology (CPT), which is composed of two single tube real-time PCR assays: the Fusarium genus-specific assay and the Fusarium solani species complex (FSSC)-specific assay with primers targeting the 28s ribosomal RNA gene. The Fusarium genus-specific assay was shown to be highly specific, detecting all reference Fusarium strains with no cross-reaction with other reference fungal strains, such as Aspergillus spp. and human DNA. The FSSC-specific assay also reacted very specifically with FSSC, except for a cross-reaction with Fusarium lunatum. To validate the real-time PCR system, we tested 87 clinical isolates of Fusarium spp. Identification results from the real-time PCR system were found to be 100% concordant with those from DNA sequencing of EF-1alpha gene. The sensitivity testing also demonstrated high sensitivity, enabling detection of one copy of standard DNA with good reproducibility. Furthermore, both assays were shown to be extremely sensitive even when fungal cells were mixed with human cells, detecting 3 germinated conidia spiked in 3mL of human blood. To apply our new real-time PCR system to the molecular diagnosis of fusariosis, we evaluated its efficacy using a mouse model of invasive F. solani infection. Plasma and whole blood samples of infected mice were tested using the real-time PCR system. The sensitivity of the real-time PCR system was found to be 100% (n=4) in plasma samples. In contrast, no amplification signal was detected in whole blood samples. This system could provide a rapid and precise diagnostic tool for early diagnosis, which is necessary for appropriate treatment and improvement of prognosis of disseminated fusariosis.
['Animals', 'DNA Primers/genetics', 'Disease Models, Animal', 'Female', 'Fusariosis/*diagnosis/*microbiology', 'Fusarium/*classification/genetics/*isolation & purification', 'Humans', 'Mice, Inbred ICR', 'Molecular Diagnostic Techniques/*methods', 'Mycology/*methods', 'RNA, Fungal/genetics', 'RNA, Ribosomal, 28S/genetics', 'Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction/*methods', 'Reproducibility of Results', 'Sensitivity and Specificity']