Adult living-donor liver transplantation for a recipient with a high preoperative 1,3-beta-D-glucan level and positive test result for Aspergillus antigen.
The patient was a 45-year-old man with underlying alcoholic liver cirrhosis. Two years prior, he was repeatedly hospitalized for liver failure symptoms and requested a living-donor liver transplantation (LDLT) because of end-stage cirrhosis. A pretransplantation blood test revealed a high 1,3-beta-d-glucan (BDG) value of 102.0 pg/mL (reference value <20.0 pg/mL) and a high blood Aspergillus antigen (AsAg) value of 1.6 cutoff index (COI; reference value <0.5 COI). Contrast-enhanced thoracoabdominal-pelvic computed tomography (CT) and cranial magnetic resonance imaging revealed no fungal infection. However, latent fungal infection could not be ruled out, hence preoperative antifungal agent treatment was administered. BDG and AsAg levels showed a decreasing trend after treatment initiation. However, normalization did not occur; the BDG and AsAg levels were 25.8 pg/mL and 1.0 COI, respectively. Although the possibility of latent fungal infection was judged low, we prophylactically administered antifungal agents after LDLT. The BDG level consistently increased at 35-39 pg/mL until postoperative day 5 but subsequently normalized. The AsAg level was higher than the limit of detection at 5.0 COI on postoperative day 3 but normalized to 0.2 COI on postoperative day 5 and did not subsequently increase. The postoperative course was uneventful despite bacterial pneumonia and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 35. A histopathologic examination (Grocott methenamine silver staining) and a fungal polymerase chain reaction assay were performed for the resected liver, but the results of both were negative. At 9 postoperative months, the patient was making ambulatory follow-up visits. Currently, the BDG and AsAg values remain normal and clinical progress is favorable. We found no reports of LDLT for a recipient with a high preoperative BDG level and positive test result for AsAg. Thus, we report on such a case with a discussion of the literature on the causes of high preoperative BDG and AsAg values.
['Antifungal Agents/*therapeutic use', 'Antigens, Fungal/*blood', 'Aspergillosis/diagnosis/*prevention & control', 'Aspergillus/*immunology', 'Biomarkers/blood', 'Humans', '*Liver Transplantation', 'Living Donors', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Postoperative Care', 'Postoperative Complications/diagnosis/*prevention & control', 'Preoperative Care', 'beta-Glucans/*blood']