General primer-mediated PCR for detection of Aspergillus species.
A PCR assay was developed for the diagnosis of invasive aspergillosis in immunocompromised patients. For this purpose, the complete nucleotide sequences of the genes encoding the 18S rRNA of Aspergillus nidulans, Aspergillus terreus, Aspergillus niger, and Aspergillus flavus were elucidated and aligned to the sequences of Aspergillus fumigatus and other clinically relevant prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms. Genus-specific sequences could be identified in the V7 to V9 region of 18S rRNA. By using hot-start PCR, Southern blot hybridization, and restriction enzyme analysis, Aspergillus-specific and -sensitive determination was achieved. Five of six immunosuppressed mice experimentally infected with A. fumigatus developed infection, and rRNA could be detected in each case, even in livers with the absence of positive cultures. Aspergillus species were detected by PCR in four neutropenic patients with proven aspergillosis, although Aspergillus species had been isolated from only one bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid sample. Aspergillus species were detected by PCR in two more patients suspected of having infection. Positive PCR signals were obtained from the BAL samples of 3 of 8 neutropenic patients who had developed pulmonary infiltrates, but none were obtained from the samples of 14 nonimmunosuppressed patients. These results indicate the potential value of PCR to detect Aspergillus species in BAL samples and, therefore, to identify neutropenic patients at risk for invasive aspergillosis.
['Adult', 'Animals', 'Aspergillosis/immunology/*microbiology', 'Aspergillus/genetics/*isolation & purification', 'Base Sequence', 'Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid/microbiology', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Immunocompromised Host', 'Lung/microbiology', 'Male', 'Mice', 'Middle Aged', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction/*methods', 'RNA, Ribosomal, 18S/*genetics', 'Sensitivity and Specificity', '*Sequence Alignment']