Phenotypic and genotypic analysis of variability in Aspergillus fumigatus.
Sixty-one isolates and collection strains of Aspergillus fumigatus were compared for their phenotypic (morphological features and isoenzyme profiles) and genotypic (restriction enzyme-generated mitochondrial DNA and ribosomal DNA profiles and random amplified polymorphic DNA patterns) features. The examined strains exhibited highly variable colony morphologies and growth rates at different temperatures, but their micromorphologies and conidial diameters were characteristic of the species. Of the isoenzymes studied, the beta-arylesterase and phosphatase patterns were the most divergent, and the 61 strains could be classified into seven groups. The glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase and catalase isoenzyme patterns displayed only a limited variability, while the profiles of superoxide dismutase, lactate dehydrogenase, and glutamate dehydrogenase were highly conserved. The HaeIII-generated mitochondrial DNA patterns and SmaI-digested repetitive DNA and ribosomal DNA hybridization patterns of almost all strains were also invariable. The level of variation was much higher when random amplified polymorphic DNA analysis was applied. Although the patterns of the strains were very similar with most of the primers, the application of some primers made it possible to cluster the A. fumigatus isolates into several groups. The results indicate that the random amplified polymorphic DNA technique could be used more efficiently than isoenzyme analysis for typing A. fumigatus isolates. A good correlation was found between the dendrograms obtained from the isoenzyme and random amplified polymorphic DNA data, but the isoenzyme and amplified DNA patterns did not correlate with the pathogenicity, pigment production, or geographical origin of the strains. One "A. fumigatus" strain (strain FRR 1266) exhibited unique isoenzyme, mitochondrial DNA, ribosomal DNA, and random amplified polymorphic DNA patterns; it is proposed that this strain represents a new species of the section Fumigati.
['Aspergillus fumigatus/*classification/cytology/enzymology/genetics', 'Base Sequence', '*Genetic Variation', 'Genotype', 'Isoenzymes', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Phenotype', 'Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length', 'Random Amplified Polymorphic DNA Technique']