Cloning and biochemical characterisation of an Aspergillus niger glucokinase. Evidence for the presence of separate glucokinase and hexokinase enzymes.
The Aspergillus niger glucokinase gene glkA has been cloned using a probe generated by polymerase chain reaction with degenerate oligonucleotides. The DNA sequence of the gene was determined, and the deduced amino acid sequence shows significant similarity to other eukaryotic hexokinase and glucokinase proteins, in particular to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae glucokinase protein. The encoded protein was purified from a multicopy glkA transformant, and extensively characterised. The protein has a molecular mass of 54536 Da and a pI of 5.2. The enzyme has high affinity for glucose (K(m) 0.063 mM at pH 7.5) and a relatively low affinity for fructose (K(m) 120 mM at pH 7.5), and in vivo fructose phosphorylation by glucokinase is consequently negligible. The configurations at C1 and C4 of the substrate appear to be essential for substrate specificity. The A. niger glucokinase shows non-competitive inhibition by ADP towards ATP and uncompetitive inhibition by ADP towards glucose. The kcal (turnover number) decreases rapidly below pH 7.5 (56% at pH 7.0 and 17% at pH 6.5) and this may have important implications for the in vivo regulation of activity. In addition, proof is provided for the presence of a second hexosephosphorylating enzyme in A. niger. This enzyme is probably a hexokinase, since unlike glucokinase, this activity is inhibited by trehalose 6-phosphate.
['Adenosine Diphosphate/metabolism', 'Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism', 'Amino Acid Sequence', 'Aspergillus niger/*enzymology/*genetics', 'Base Sequence', 'Chemical Phenomena', 'Chemistry, Physical', 'Cloning, Molecular', 'DNA, Fungal/genetics', 'Genes, Fungal', 'Glucokinase/*chemistry/*genetics/metabolism', 'Hexokinase/*genetics/metabolism', 'Hexoses/metabolism', 'Isoelectric Point', 'Kinetics', 'Molecular Sequence Data', 'Molecular Weight', 'Phosphorylation', 'Phylogeny', 'Substrate Specificity']