Molecular diagnosis and epidemiology of fungal infections.
A variety of methods are utilized for DNA strain subtyping of Candida spp. because no 'gold standard' exists. Random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) or restriction enzyme analysis (REA) are useful to determine the source of an outbreak, but more reproducible and discriminatory methods such as Southern hybridization and pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) may be required. When applied to some nosocomial Candida infections, multiple strains and species have been identified. Microevolution of yeast species occurs and epidemiologically related isolates may show minor pattern differences, creating uncertainty as to whether they are distinct strains. Approximately 1000 isolates of Aspergillus fumigatus from environmental and clinical sources were typed by REA probed with an A. fumigatus-specific retrotransposon-like sequence. Patients with no symptom of aspergillosis may carry several strains, whereas patients with pulmonary aspergillosis may carry one or two strains; nocosomial transmission of aspergillosis was proven in 39% of the patients studied; any given environmental strain can be infectious; the environmental population of A. fumigatus is extremely diverse and no specific niche was found in the hospital. A PCR assay was designed to target conserved 18S-ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequences shared by most fungi and a 687 bp product was amplified from 25 medically important fungal species. Studies with blood, cerebrospinal fluid and sputum specimens from patients with mycoses indicated that the PCR assay is more sensitive in diagnosing invasive fungal infections than blood culture methods. More specific identification is obtainable with genus/species-specif c probes designed from within the PCR-amplified sequences for C. albicans, C. krusei, C. lusitaniae, Pneumocystis carinii, Cryptococcus neoformans, Aspergillus/Penicillium spp. and C. glabrata/Saccharomyces cerevisiae. A. fumigatus and A. niger were differentiated by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. In situ hybridization (ISH) detected a 648 bp fragment of the 18S rDNA of C. neoformans and a 568 bp fragment of the alkaline proteinase gene of A. fumigatus in tissues from experimentally infected animals. In ISH, the entire process can be automated, making this procedure rapid and easy. The difficulty in establishing a diagnosis of invasive candidiasis has prompted the quest for a clinically useful PCR test for candidaemia. The universal fungal oligonucleotide primer pair, ITS3 and ITS4, amplifies portions of the 5.8S ad 28S rDNA subunits, and the ITS2 region. Although rRNA genes are highly conserved, the ITS regions are distinctive. DNA probes were designed from ITS2 that were specific for 16 different Candida species. Simple, rapid sample preparation was suitable for PCR analysis of BacT/Alert blood culture bottles. Sample preparation, PCR, and EIA detection of the amplicon from five different Candida species was accomplished in 7 h, 2.5 days sooner than by conventional culture methods. As well as saving time, minor yeast species among a major species, or among bacteria, were simultaneously detected. PCR-EIA using a microtitration plate format had sensitivity 10-times greater than that obtained with ethidium bromide-stained agarose gels. Taqman combines in one step PCR, probe hybridization, and fluorescent signal generation. Taqman PCR had sensitivity equivalent to PCR-EIA and required only 5 h, including sample preparation.
['Aspergillosis/*diagnosis/epidemiology/microbiology', 'Aspergillus/*classification/genetics/isolation & purification', 'Candida/*classification/genetics/isolation & purification', 'Candidiasis/*diagnosis/epidemiology/microbiology', 'Humans', 'Molecular Epidemiology', '*Mycological Typing Techniques', 'Mycoses/*diagnosis/epidemiology/microbiology']