Impact of blastomere biopsy and cryopreservation techniques on human embryo viability.
The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the effect of cryopreservation on 55 embryos which had one blastomere biopsied for preimplantation genetic diagnosis of aneuploidy before freezing. The thawing outcome was compared to that obtained in 94 embryos which derived from our conventional freezing programme in patients with comparable characteristics who were treated in the same period. Their embryos were morphologically similar but the incidence of aneuploidy was 100% in the biopsy group and unknown in the controls. The percentage of embryos which survived intact after thawing was significantly lower in the biopsied group compared to the controls (9 versus 25% respectively; P < 0.025), whereas the rate of lysis was superior among biopsied embryos (34 versus 13% in the controls; P < 0.001). Similarly, the survival index was higher in the frozen-intact embryos than in the embryos which were frozen after biopsy (61 versus 38%; P < 0.001). No empty zonae resulted in the control group, while six were found after thawing biopsied embryos. In the second part of the study, blastomere biopsy was implemented on 102 thawed embryos generated by 16 patients. The chromosomal analyses revealed that 49 were normal, leading to the transfer of 2.5 +/- 0.8 embryos per patient. Only three clinical pregnancies were obtained, and are presently ongoing. In conclusion, the present findings discourage the use of conventional cryopreservation protocols in strategies involving preimplantation genetic diagnosis in human reproductive medicine. Adequate protocols are required for freezing and thawing embryos which have been subjected to biopsy procedures.
['Adult', '*Biopsy', 'Blastomeres/*physiology', '*Chromosome Aberrations', '*Cryopreservation', 'Embryo Transfer', 'Embryo, Mammalian/*physiology', 'Embryonic Development', 'Female', 'Fertilization in Vitro', 'Humans', 'In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence', 'Pregnancy', 'Pregnancy Outcome', '*Prenatal Diagnosis']