Birth of twin males with normal karyotype after intracytoplasmic sperm injection with use of testicular spermatozoa from a nonmosaic patient with Klinefelter's syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: To report the birth of healthy twin males after the use of testicular spermatozoa from a nonmosaic patient with Klinefelter's syndrome. DESIGN: Case report. SETTING: Private reproduction center with university affiliation. PATIENT(S): A couple undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) combined with testicular sperm extraction because of the husband's secretory azoospermia and a nonmosaic 47,XXY peripheral blood karyotype. The wife, a healthy female, presented with a history of oligomenorrhea. INTERVENTION(S): ICSI was performed using testicular spermatozoa; 3 mM pentoxifylline solution was used to induce sperm motility because the spermatozoa recovered were all immotile. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Normal fertilization, embryo cleavage, pregnancy outcome, and peripheral blood karyotype of the newborns. RESULT(S): Thirteen metaphase II oocytes were injected. Seven of them fertilized normally and six did not fertilize. Three good-quality embryos (4-cell stage class II) were transferred, and four were cryopreserved at the two-cell and four-cell stages using a slow freezing protocol. Twelve days after ET, a beta-hCG determination was positive. Ultrasonographic examination revealed three intrauterine fetal sacs, but one of them showed a fetal pole without cardiac activity and vanished in subsequent ultrasonographic examinations. The patient delivered twins with normal male peripheral blood karyotypes. CONCLUSION(S): Normal outcome after the use of testicular sperm extraction and ICSI in a nonmosaic patient with Klinefelter's syndrome reaffirms the notion of low transmission risk of this gonosomal aneuploidy.
['Adult', 'Chorionic Gonadotropin, beta Subunit, Human/blood', 'Female', 'Fertilization in Vitro/*methods', 'Humans', '*Karyotyping', 'Klinefelter Syndrome/*complications/genetics', 'Male', '*Microinjections', 'Oligospermia/etiology/therapy', 'Pregnancy', 'Pregnancy Outcome', 'Spermatozoa/physiology', 'Testis/*cytology', '*Twins', 'Ultrasonography, Prenatal']