History of miscarriage and increased incidence of fetal aneuploidy in subsequent pregnancy.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to examine the association between history of spontaneous abortion and aneuploidy in a subsequent pregnancy. METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study of women who underwent fetal karyotype analysis with amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling at a single prenatal diagnosis center. Information on spontaneous abortions, parity, maternal age, ethnicity, type of prenatal diagnosis, and karyotype was assessed. Univariable and multivariable analyses were conducted. RESULTS: A total of 46,939 women were included in our analysis. Women with no prior spontaneous abortions had a 1.39% risk for any aneuploidy. In women with one prior spontaneous abortion, this risk increased to 1.67%; for women with 2 previous spontaneous abortions, the risk increased to 1.84%; and for those women who had had 3 or more prior spontaneous abortions, the risk increased further to 2.18% (P < .007). When controlling for maternal age, parity, ethnicity, and mode of prenatal diagnosis and compared with women with no prior spontaneous abortions, women with one prior spontaneous abortion (adjusted odds ratio [AOR] 1.21, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.01-1.47) or 3 or more prior spontaneous abortions (AOR 1.51, 95% CI 1.02-2.25) had a statistically significant increase in aneuploidy in a subsequent pregnancy. Women with 2 prior spontaneous abortions had an AOR of 1.26 for aneuploidy, but the 95% CI contained unity. CONCLUSION: An increased risk of karyotypic abnormality identified at the time of prenatal diagnosis is demonstrated in patients with an increasing number of spontaneous abortions. This study provides information regarding this risk among women presenting for prenatal diagnosis. According to our data, for a woman with an a priori risk of 1 in 300 for Down syndrome, 3 prior spontaneous abortions would increase that risk by 47% to 1 in 204. These results should be confirmed in low-risk populations.
['Abortion, Spontaneous/*epidemiology', 'Adult', 'Age Factors', '*Aneuploidy', 'Cohort Studies', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Incidence', 'Karyotyping', 'Pregnancy', 'Prenatal Diagnosis', '*Reproductive History', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Risk Assessment']