[Risk factors associated with neonatal tumors. Experience of a pediatric environmental health specialty unit in Valencia (Spain)].
BACKGROUND: Neonatal tumors (NT) result from a variable combination of constitutional and environmental determinants. Multiple risk factors (RF) are involved in their development, although most are unknown. OBJECTIVE: To document the constitutional, environmental, preconceptional and transplacental RF associated with the development of NT with greater or lesser scientific evidence. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We investigated known RF in NT diagnosed at La Fe University Children's Hospital from January 1990 to December 1999, using a questionnaire completed by parents in a personal interview, either at the Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit (PEHSU-Valencia) or at their home. RF associated with NT and childhood cancer were identified through a literature review of the last 25 years through Medline, Cancerlit, Science Citation Index, and Embase. RESULTS: The questionnaire was completed in 59 of 74 NT diagnosed during the period studied. All patients were Caucasians born in Spain. Constitutional-genetic factors were identified in 13.6 %: dominant hereditary syndromes in 5 (familial retinoblastoma in 1 and tuberous sclerosis in 4), and non-hereditary chromosomal syndromes in 3 (trisomy 21). Notable environmental factors were: a) ionizing radiation: preconceptional exposure in 32.2 % and in utero exposure in 6.8 %; b) non-ionizing radiation; 54.2 % reported preconceptional exposure and in utero exposure at home; c) pregnancy-related problems: infections in 13.6 % (8 patients) and a prior history of miscarriage in 20.3 %; d) drugs/chemicals administered during pregnancy: capillary dye in 42.4 %, daily facial make-up in 45.8 %, antacids in 30.5 %, acetaminophen in 34 %, hormone therapy in 10 %, cocaine and marijuana consumption in 11.7 %; e) tobacco: exposure to active smoking in 93.2 % of patients; f) alcohol: in utero exposure in 6.8 %; g) occupational exposure in parents: paternal in 49 % of cases (hydrocarbons in 15, metal in 3, chemical in 2, timber in 2, and agriculture in 7). Four were exposed to pesticides, 3 to solvents, and 3 to paints; and maternal in 12 cases (20 %): low frequency non-ionizing radiation in 6 (textile in 5, and railway in 1), 5 in the service sector (2 hairdressers, 3 cleaners), and 1 the in chemical industry. In another 6 there was exposure to solvents and paints (footwear industry). CONCLUSIONS: The hypotheses formulated in this observational study, which should be analyzed in future case-control and cohort studies, are: a) to scientifically document genetic-constitutional RF in the etiopathogenesis of NT; b) to determine the frequency and etiology of prior miscarriage and its possible association with NT; c) to determine the importance of active smoking before and during pregnancy as a RF for NT; d) to establish the importance of parental occupational exposure in the etiopathogenesis of NT; and e) to define more precisely the role of other physical and chemical RF in the development of NT. To determine and record the RF involved in the etiopathogenesis of NT, the environmental history should be documented in pediatric cancers. The identification of RF is one of the main objectives of Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Units.
['Environmental Health', 'Female', 'Hospital Units', 'Humans', 'Infant, Newborn', 'Male', 'Neoplasms/*epidemiology', 'Pregnancy', 'Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects', 'Risk Factors', 'Spain']