Second-trimester ductus venosus measurement and adverse perinatal outcome in fetuses with congenital heart disease.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether Doppler velocimetry of the ductus venosus (DV) predicts adverse perinatal outcome in congenital heart disease (CHD). METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of all pregnant women undergoing fetal echocardiography for CHD in a single perinatal center during a 2-year period. We compared outcomes for fetuses having a diagnosis of CHD in the second trimester and abnormal DV Doppler velocimetric findings with those having CHD and normal DV Doppler findings. Karyotype, gestational age at delivery, fetal loss rate, and rate of termination were assessed. The referral value for an abnormal DV pulsatility index was above the 95th percentile for gestational age. Statistical analysis included the t test, Fisher exact test, and chi(2) test. RESULTS: The incidence of CHD in our population was 7%. There were 98 patients with CHD; of those, 31 had DV measurement. A total of 9 patients had an abnormal DV. Three of this group (33%) had intrauterine fetal death or perinatal death. In patients with CHD and normal DV measurements, 83% had living children versus 33% in the group with an abnormal DV (P < .05). There was no statistically significant difference in the rate of aneuploidy between the normal DV (15%) and abnormal DV (20%) groups (P = .65). The mean gestational age at delivery was similar between the normal (37.63 weeks) and abnormal (38.33 weeks) DV groups (P = .71). There was no difference in the rate of pregnancy termination. CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal second-trimester DV measurements are predictive of adverse perinatal outcome in patients with CHD, independent of karyotype or gestational age at delivery. This information may have a role in the counseling of parents with CHD.
['Blood Flow Velocity', 'Chi-Square Distribution', 'Echocardiography, Doppler', 'Female', 'Heart Defects, Congenital/*diagnostic imaging/epidemiology', 'Humans', 'Incidence', 'Infant, Newborn', 'Predictive Value of Tests', 'Pregnancy', 'Pregnancy Outcome', 'Pregnancy Trimester, Second', 'Pulsatile Flow', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Ultrasonography, Prenatal/*methods', 'Umbilical Veins/*diagnostic imaging', 'United States/epidemiology']