Maternal severe migraine and risk of congenital limb deficiencies.
BACKGROUND: Migraines occurs frequently during pregnancy; however, there are no published data on their possible teratogenic potential in a controlled epidemiological study. Therefore, we examined the risk of congenital abnormalities in infants born to women who had migraines and other headaches during pregnancy. METHODS: Between 1980 and 1996, the Hungarian Case-Control Surveillance of Congenital Abnormalities evaluated 22,843 cases (newborns or fetuses) with congenital abnormalities, 38,151 control newborn infants without any abnormalities, and 834 malformed controls with Down syndrome. RESULTS: Migraines anytime during pregnancy occurred in 565 (2.5%) mothers of the case group compared with 713 (1.9%) mothers in the control group (crude prevalence odds ratio [POR], 1.3; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.2-1.5) and 24 (2.9%) pregnant women in the malformed control group (crude POR, 0.9; 95% CI, 0.6-1.3) The mothers of 247 cases, 533 controls, and 21 malformed controls had severe migraines during the second and/or third months of pregnancy. There was only 1 congenital abnormality group: limb deficiencies, which had a higher rate of maternal migraines during the second and third months of pregnancy both at the comparison of cases and matched controls (adjusted POR, 2.5; 95% CI, 1.1-5.8) and of cases and malformed controls (adjusted POR, 1.7; 95% CI, 1.3-3.0). There was no association between other headaches and different congenital abnormalities at the comparison of cases and controls. CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed that maternal severe migraines during the second and/or third months of pregnancy were associated with an increased risk of congenital limb deficiencies. A similar association was not detected between congenital anomalies and other headaches during pregnancy. Our study was not based on a prior hypothesis; therefore, these data can be considered only as a signal that needs confirmation by independent data sets.
['Adult', 'Case-Control Studies', 'Data Collection', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Hungary', 'Infant, Newborn', 'Limb Deformities, Congenital/*etiology', 'Male', 'Migraine Disorders/*complications', 'Pregnancy', '*Pregnancy Complications', 'Pregnancy Trimester, First', 'Prospective Studies', 'Registries', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Risk Factors']