The validation and translation of Multidimensional Measure of Informed Choice in Greek.
OBJECTIVE: to translate the original English version of the Multidimensional Measure of Informed Choice (MMIC) into Greek, to adapt it culturally to Greece, and to determine its psychometric properties for the assessment of informed choice in antenatal screening for Down syndrome. DESIGN: survey using self-administrated questionnaires. SETTING: public hospital in Athens, Greece. PARTICIPANTS: 135 pregnant women with gestational age between 11th and 20th week just prior to having antenatal screening for Down syndrome. FINDINGS: 96% of women had a positive attitude towards screening and 45% had a good level of knowledge concerning the screening process for Down syndrome. Using a standard measure of informed choice, validated for use in Greek, it was found that 44% of women made an informed choice, and thus 56% of women made an uninformed choice. The internal consistency of the scales was good; Cronbach's alpha was found to be 0.76 for the attitude scale and 0.64 for the knowledge scale, suggesting that all items were appropriate to measure. The performed factor analysis of the attitude scale indicated three factors with an eigenvalue over 1.0. Those factors were responsible for 87% of the variance. KEY CONCLUSIONS: this study indicates that the Greek version of the MMIC appears to be a reliable and valid tool for measuring informed choice in antenatal screening for Down syndrome. Due to its short length and consumption of time, it seems to be a practical instrument for use in Greek antenatal clinics.
['Choice Behavior', '*Down Syndrome/diagnosis/epidemiology', 'Factor Analysis, Statistical', 'Female', 'Fetal Diseases/diagnosis/epidemiology', 'Gestational Age', 'Greece/epidemiology', 'Health Services Research', 'Humans', 'Informed Consent', 'Mass Screening', 'Pregnancy', '*Prenatal Diagnosis/psychology/standards', 'Reproducibility of Results', '*Translations', 'Weights and Measures/*standards']