Knowledge of prenatal screening and psychological management of test decisions.
OBJECTIVES: To study associations between pregnant women's knowledge of prenatal screening and decisional conflict in deciding whether to participate in first-trimester screening for Down syndrome in a setting of required informed consent, and to study associations between knowledge and personal wellbeing, and worries in pregnancy. METHODS: A population-based cross-sectional study with 6427 pregnant women consecutively included before the time of a nuchal translucency scan. Participants were recruited from three Danish obstetric departments offering prenatal screening free of charge. The results presented are based on 4111 pregnant women (64%). Knowledge was measured using 15 questions. The primary outcomes were measured using pre-existing validated scales, i.e. The Decisional Conflict Scale, the WHO Well-Being Index and the Cambridge Worry Scale. Associations were analyzed by multivariate logistic and linear regression analyses. RESULTS: A higher level of knowledge was associated with less decisional conflict when deciding whether to participate in first-trimester Down syndrome screening (adjusted odds ratio 1.31 (95% CI, 1.26-1.37)). An increased level of knowledge was also associated with higher levels of wellbeing (adjusted linear coefficient 0.51 (95% CI, 0.26-0.75), P < 0.001). Knowledge was not associated with worries, either in general or specifically about something being wrong with the baby. CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate the importance of ensuring a high level of knowledge for pregnant women making choices about participation in prenatal screening for Down syndrome in order to improve the psychological management of test decisions.
['Adolescent', 'Adult', 'Choice Behavior', 'Cross-Sectional Studies', 'Decision Making', 'Denmark/epidemiology', 'Down Syndrome/*diagnosis/epidemiology/psychology', 'Female', '*Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice', 'Humans', 'Informed Consent', 'Nuchal Translucency Measurement', 'Odds Ratio', 'Patient Acceptance of Health Care/psychology/*statistics & numerical data', 'Pregnancy', 'Prenatal Diagnosis/*methods/psychology', 'Surveys and Questionnaires', 'Young Adult']