More invasive procedures are done to detect each case of Down's syndrome in younger women.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the performance of first-trimester combined screening in 5-year periods according to maternal age in a low-risk population. DESIGN: A prospective study. SETTING: Multicenter study in Finland. POPULATION: A total of 76949 voluntary women with singleton pregnancies participated in first-trimester combined screening in public healthcare between 1 May 2002 and 31 December 2008. METHODS: The serum samples were analyzed using the PerkinElmer AutoDELFIA(R) time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay kit for the measurement of pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A and free beta-human chorionic gonadotropin. Nuchal translucency was measured by trained personnel (midwives or physicians) in a university or central hospital. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Performance, detection rate, false positive rate and the number of invasive procedures needed to detect a single case of Down's syndrome were analyzed. RESULTS: There was a direct connection between maternal age and the prevalence of Down's syndrome with a low prevalence in young women being 1:1 193 in the 25-29 age group and 1:150 in the 35-39 age group. Consequently, for a fixed false positive rate of 5%, the number of invasive procedures needed to detect one case of Down's syndrome is higher in younger women to achieve the same detection rate. CONCLUSIONS: In combined first trimester screening the risk for Down's syndrome is individual, varying with maternal age. This should be taken into consideration when counseling women.
['Adult', 'Biomarkers/blood', 'Chorionic Gonadotropin, beta Subunit, Human/blood', 'Down Syndrome/*blood/*diagnosis', 'Early Diagnosis', 'False Positive Reactions', 'Female', 'Finland', 'Gestational Age', 'Humans', '*Maternal Age', 'Middle Aged', 'Nuchal Translucency Measurement', 'Pregnancy', 'Pregnancy Trimester, First', 'Pregnancy-Associated Plasma Protein-A/metabolism', 'Prenatal Diagnosis/*methods', 'Prevalence', 'Prospective Studies', 'Risk Factors']