Trisomic pregnancy and elevated FSH: implications for the oocyte pool hypothesis.
BACKGROUND: Some studies, but not all, support the hypothesis that trisomy frequency is related to the size of the oocyte pool, with the risk increased for women with fewer oocytes (older ovarian age). We tested this hypothesis by comparing hormonal indicators of ovarian age among women who had trisomic pregnancy losses with indicators among women with non-trisomic losses or chromosomally normal births. The three primary indicators of advanced ovarian age were low level of anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH), high level of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and low level of inhibin B. METHODS: The analysis drew on data from two hospital-based case-control studies. Data were analyzed separately and the evidence from the two sites was combined. We compared 159 women with trisomic pregnancy losses to three comparison groups: 60 women with other chromosomally abnormal losses, 79 women with chromosomally normal losses and 344 women with live births (LBs) age-matched to women with losses. We analyzed the hormone measures as continuous and as categorical variables. All analyses adjust for age in single years, day of blood draw, interval in storage and site. RESULTS: AMH and inhibin B did not differ between women with trisomic losses and any of the three comparison groups. Mean ln(FSH) was 0.137 units (95% confidence interval (CI): 0.055, 0.219) higher for trisomy cases compared with LB controls; it was also higher, though not significantly so, for trisomy cases compared with women with other chromosomally abnormal losses or chromosomally normal losses. The adjusted odds ratio in relation to high FSH (>/= 10 mIU/ml) was significantly increased for trisomy cases versus LB controls (adjusted odds ratio (OR): 3.8, 95% CI: 1.6, 8.9). CONCLUSIONS: The association of trisomy with elevated FSH is compatible with the oocyte pool hypothesis, whereas the absence of an association with AMH is not. Alternative interpretations are considered, including the possibility that elevated FSH may disrupt meiotic processes or allow recruitment of abnormal follicles.
['Adult', '*Aneuploidy', 'Anti-Mullerian Hormone/*blood', 'Case-Control Studies', 'Female', 'Follicle Stimulating Hormone/*blood', 'Humans', 'Inhibins/*blood', 'Maternal Age', 'Oocytes/*physiology', 'Ovary', 'Pregnancy', 'Pregnancy Complications/*genetics', '*Trisomy']