Is the prevalence of Down syndrome births in Hawai'i increasing?
PURPOSE: In response to a study published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in 2009, which indicated that the prevalence of Down syndrome births was increasing in the 10 regions studied, this study examined whether a similar trend was occurring in Hawai'i. METHODS: Data were obtained from the Hawai'i State Department of : Health Birth Defects Program for the years 1997-2005. The information was analyzed by numbers of live births and outcomes of Down syndrome pregnancies, by ratio of terminations to live births, by age of mother (< 35 years or >/= 35 years), by maternal ethnicity, and by whether the baby was born with a congenital heart defect (a frequent concomitant condition of babies born with Down Syndrome). These results were compared with previously published studies on the prevalence of Down syndrome births and pregnancies in Hawai'i and were also compared with recently published data of the CDC. FINDINGS: THE STUDY FOUND THAT THE PREVALENCE OF DOWN SYNDROME : births for Hawai'i over the nine-year period did not change significantly. Thus, this finding did not match the findings of the CDC study. Additionally, the data showed that the prevalence of congenital heart defects was higher in Hawai'i than in other areas. However, because of changes in the resources available to the Hawai'i Birth Defects Program, fully comparing in all respects data from the 1997-2005 period with studies conducted earlier in Hawai'i was not possible. CONCLUSIONS: THE DATA IDENTIFIED A NUMBER OF AREAS IN NEED OF FURTHER : study. These areas include the following: 1) an examination of the kinds of information and counseling given by primary care providers to women following a prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome; 2) analysis of the characteristics, values, and choices made by these women to terminate the pregnancy or continue it to term; and 3) determination of why the prevalence of congenital heart defects appears higher among births of babies with Down syndrome in Hawai'i than elsewhere.
['Adult', 'Down Syndrome/diagnosis/*epidemiology', 'Ethnic Groups/*statistics & numerical data', 'Female', 'Hawaii/epidemiology', 'Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis/*epidemiology', 'Humans', 'Infant, Newborn', 'Male', 'Maternal Age', 'Pregnancy', 'Prenatal Diagnosis/*methods', 'Prevalence', 'Registries', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Risk Assessment', 'Severity of Illness Index', 'Sex Distribution', 'Young Adult']