Women's decision-making in prenatal screening.
With serum screening (MS-AFP and hCG testing for Down's syndrome) women have to make several decisions in a limited time: whether to participate in the screening in the first place; then, if increased risk for fetal abnormality is detected, whether to have a diagnostic test, and finally, what to do if fetal abnormality is detected. The aim of this study was to examine how women themselves in an unselected population describe their decision-making in the different phases of serum screening. Women receiving a positive result from serum screening in two Finnish towns from September 1993 to March 1994 and a group of individually matched controls were invited to semistructured interviews; 45 index and 46 control women (79% of those invited) participated between their 29th and 37th weeks of gestation (mean 31 weeks). Although serum screening was most often presented as voluntary or as an option, half the women described participation as a routine or self-evident act; only one-fourth of the women described actively deciding about participation. After a positive screening result, women's reactions to diagnostic tests, and their intentions if disability would be detected, varied greatly. Most of the women actively decided about having diagnostic tests, but for 23% participation in diagnostic testing was called a self-evident act. Women's intentions regarding abortion varied from a firm decision to abort to a firm decision not to abort, and many remained ambivalent. Prenatal screening, which demands the making of several decisions in a limited time and is offered to all pregnant women as part of established maternity care, is not based on every participant's active decision-making and thus creates an ethical problem. This problem should receive special attention from those who develop, introduce and decide on new health care practices.
['Abortion, Eugenic/psychology', 'Adult', 'Chorionic Gonadotropin/analysis', 'Chorionic Villi Sampling/psychology', '*Decision Making', 'Down Syndrome/prevention & control/psychology', 'Female', 'Finland', 'Health Knowledge, Attitudes, Practice', 'Humans', 'Infant, Newborn', 'Nephritis, Hereditary/prevention & control/psychology', 'Patient Acceptance of Health Care/*psychology', 'Pregnancy', 'Prenatal Diagnosis/*psychology', 'alpha-Fetoproteins/analysis']