Possible role of immune surveillance at the initial phase of metastasis produced by B16BL6 melanoma cells.
The relationship among the real-time trafficking of lung metastatic B16BL6 cells, metastatic potential, and the injected number of the cells was examined, since the smaller the number of tumor cells injected, the more clearly the immune defense may be observed. When 1x10(6) or 1x10(5) B16BL6 cells were injected into mice via the tail vein, both numbers of cells accumulated in the lung at a similar rate: there was an approximately 10-fold difference in the number of accumulated cells between the two doses. Elimination from the lung was not dependent on the cell number but on the proportion of accumulated cells. However, the injection of 1x10(4) cells resulted in lung accumulation less than one-tenth of that obtained with 1x10(5) cell injection. Metastasis was observed when 1x10(5) or 1x10(6) B16BL6 cells were injected, but not after injection of 1x10(4) cells. To clarify the roles of the immune defense system at the initial phase of metastasis, we challenged macrophage-depleted mice with 1x10(4) tumor cells. Treatment of mice with 2-chloroadenosine prior to the tumor cell challenge cancelled the suppression of not only metastasis but also the lung accumulation. Furthermore, the administration of 2-chloroadenosine following the tumor cell challenge had little effect on the metastatic potential. These results suggest that the immune surveillance whose action was obvious at the low dose of challenged tumor cells functions strongly at the initial phase but not at the advanced stages of the metastatic process, and that macrophages play an important role in the suppression of metastasis.
['2-Chloroadenosine/pharmacology', 'Animals', '*Immunologic Surveillance', 'Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/*immunology', 'Melanoma, Experimental/diagnostic imaging/*immunology', 'Mice', 'Neoplasm Metastasis', 'Neoplasm Transplantation', 'Neoplastic Cells, Circulating/drug effects/immunology', 'Time Factors', 'Tomography, Emission-Computed']