The role of lung perfusion imaging in predicting the direction of radiation-induced changes in pulmonary function tests.
BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to determine whether preradiation (pre-RT) single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) lung perfusion scans can be used to predict RT-induced changes in pulmonary function tests (PFTs). METHODS: Ninety-four patients irradiated for thoracic tumors had pre-RT SPECT lung perfusion scans. The presence of SPECT hypoperfusion distal to a central mediastinal tumor was qualitatively assessed visually without knowledge of PFT changes. Patients were grouped based on whether the diffusion capacity (DLCO) ever increased post-RT. Comparisons of patient groups were performed using 1-tailed Fisher exact tests. Patient follow-up was 6-56 months (mean, 30 months). To assess SPECT hypoperfusion objectively, the average dose to the computed tomography (CT)-defined lung was compared with the weighted-average dose (based on relative perfusion) to the SPECT-defined lung. The ratio between the CT- and SPECT-defined mean lung dose provided a quantitative assessment of hypoperfusion. The mean ratio for patients with central tumor and adjacent hypoperfusion was compared with that of the others (Wilcoxon rank-sum one-sided test). RESULTS: In patients with central tumors, 41% (9 of 22) with adjacent hypoperfusion had improvements in DLCO following radiation, versus 18% (3 of 17) of those without hypoperfusion (P = 0.11). In patients with lung carcinoma, the corresponding ratios were 40% (8 of 20) and 10% (1 of 10), respectively (P = 0.10). The mean ratio of CT dose to SPECT dose was 1.35 for patients with central tumors and adjacent hypoperfusion versus 1.16 for others (P = 0.017). CONCLUSIONS: The presence of SPECT hypoperfusion adjacent to a central mediastinal mass may identify patients likely to have improved PFTs following RT. Thus, SPECT imaging may be useful in models for predicting radiation-induced changes in PFTs.
['Adult', 'Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Carcinoma/physiopathology/radiotherapy', 'Female', 'Follow-Up Studies', 'Forecasting', 'Humans', 'Lung/*diagnostic imaging/physiopathology/radiation effects', 'Lung Neoplasms/physiopathology/radiotherapy', 'Lung Volume Measurements', 'Male', 'Mediastinal Neoplasms/physiopathology/radiotherapy', 'Middle Aged', 'Prospective Studies', 'Pulmonary Diffusing Capacity/radiation effects', 'Radiation Dosage', 'Radiopharmaceuticals', '*Respiratory Function Tests', 'Spirometry', 'Statistics as Topic', 'Technetium Tc 99m Aggregated Albumin', 'Thoracic Neoplasms/physiopathology/*radiotherapy', '*Tomography, Emission-Computed, Single-Photon/methods', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']