Intrathoracic and intra-abdominal Tl-201 abnormalities seen on rotating raw cine data on dual radionuclide myocardial perfusion and gated SPECT.
PURPOSE: The lower thorax and upper abdomen are visualized during cardiac acquisition of rest Tl-201 and stress Tc-99m tetrofosmin gated SPECT. Thus, abnormal Tl-201 localization in these areas and in organs such as parts of the lungs, liver, spleen, and kidneys can be observed, including rotating raw cine data. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Other than cardiac images, the authors retrospectively reviewed Tl-201 rotating (raw data) images of 235 patients. Abnormal findings in the lungs, liver, spleen, and kidneys were identified that correlated with the patients' clinical information; radiographic findings, including computed tomography and ultrasonography of the abdomen; other scintigraphic studies; and laboratory findings. RESULTS: In 53 patients, 54 abnormalities were detected. Intrathoracic abnormalities included focal areas of increased uptake, one in the right lower lung and another in the right upper lung that confirmed lung cancer, in 2 patients; diffuse uptake in both lungs in 11 patients; photopenia in the lung bases, which had resulted from pleural effusions, in 3 patients; and abnormal right liver configuration caused by elevation of the right hemidiaphragm in 1 patient. Of the intra-abdominal abnormalities, 12 patients with splenomegaly were identified. Six patients had focal areas of increased uptake in the gastric area. Nonvisualization of one kidney resulted from a congenitally absent right kidney in 1 patient, from right nephrectomy in 1 patient, from end-stage renal disease in another, and from a lower position of the left or right kidneys in 5 patients. Small and decreased uptake of both kidneys resulted from end-stage renal disease in 1 patient. Small and decreased uptake of one kidney was noted in 1 patient with renal scarring, in 1 patient with a renal stone, in 3 patients with chronic pyelonephritis, and in 5 patients with renal cyst(s). CONCLUSIONS: Discernible intrathoracic and intra-abdominal abnormalities using rotating raw cine data from imaging in three-dimensional displays include diffuse or focal pulmonary uptake, pleural effusion, elevation of a hemidiaphragm, splenomegaly, increased uptake in the gastric area, renal abnormalities including absent or small kidneys, end-stage renal disease, renal scarring, renal cyst(s), and lower position of a kidney. The incidental finding of such abnormalities may prompt further clinical investigation.
['Abdomen/*diagnostic imaging/pathology', 'Cardiovascular Diseases/complications/diagnostic imaging', 'Digestive System Diseases/complications/diagnosis/diagnostic imaging', 'Gated Blood-Pool Imaging/*methods', 'Humans', 'Kidney Diseases/complications/diagnosis/diagnostic imaging', 'Lung Diseases/complications/diagnosis/diagnostic imaging', 'Motion Pictures as Topic', 'Organophosphorus Compounds', 'Organotechnetium Compounds', 'Radiopharmaceuticals', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Sensitivity and Specificity', 'Thallium', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed', 'Ultrasonography']