Detection of early recurrence with 18F-FDG PET in patients with cervical cancer.
UNLABELLED: This study investigated the feasibility of PET with (18)F-FDG to evaluate retrospectively early recurrence in patients with cervical cancer. METHODS: From September 1997 to March 2000, 249 patients with no evidence of cervical cancer after treatment were investigated with (18)F-FDG PET. (18)F-FDG PET scanning, beginning 50 min after injection of 370-555 MBq (18)F-FDG, was performed. (18)F-FDG uptake other than physiologic uptake was evaluated with the standardized uptake value and was analyzed by 2 observers who were unaware of CT or MRI data. CT or MRI and needle biopsies were performed to evaluate the positive lesions on (18)F-FDG PET, and all patients were monitored closely for 6 mo for recurrence. RESULTS: Of the 249 patients, 80 patients (32.1%) showed positive lesions with (18)F-FDG PET, and 28 patients (11.2%) were clinically or histologically confirmed as having recurrences. Eighty-two percent of recurrence was detected within 6-18 mo after diagnosis, and 89% of recurrence occurred in Federation Internationale de Gynecologie et d'Obstetrique (FIGO) stage IIb and stage III patients. The sensitivity and specificity of (18)F-FDG PET for detection of early recurrence were 90.3% and 76.1%, respectively. The sensitivity of (18)F-FDG PET was high in mediastinal, hilar, and scalene lymph nodes, spine, and liver; however, the sensitivity was relatively low in lung, retrovesical lymph nodes, and paraaortic lymph nodes. Three false-negative cases were detected in lung, retrovesical lymph nodes, and paraaortic lymph nodes. CONCLUSION: (18)F-FDG PET was effective in detecting early recurrences in cervical cancer patients with no evidence of disease. (18)F-FDG PET may be a useful follow-up method for cervical cancer, thereby providing the patients with early opportunities for sophisticated treatments.
['Adult', 'Aged', 'Carcinoma/*diagnostic imaging/*secondary/therapy', 'Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnostic imaging/secondary/therapy', 'Feasibility Studies', 'Female', '*Fluorodeoxyglucose F18', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/secondary', 'Lymphatic Metastasis', 'Middle Aged', 'Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/*diagnostic imaging', 'Predictive Value of Tests', '*Radiopharmaceuticals', 'Sensitivity and Specificity', '*Tomography, Emission-Computed', 'Uterine Cervical Neoplasms/*diagnostic imaging/therapy']