Positron emission tomography in limited-stage small-cell lung cancer: a prospective study.
PURPOSE: To determine how often positron emission tomography with [(18)F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG-PET) detects extensive-stage small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) in patients considered to have limited-stage disease based on conventional staging procedures, and to determine the impact of PET on treatment planning for presumed limited-stage SCLC. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We prospectively performed pretreatment FDG-PET on 24 patients determined by conventional staging methods to have limited-stage SCLC (defined as disease that could be encompassed within a reasonable radiotherapy portal, excluding bilateral supraclavicular disease). PET images were evaluated for evidence of extensive-stage disease. Tumor-node-metastasis system staging was also assigned for each patient, with and without PET information. RESULTS: FDG-PET demonstrated findings consistent with extensive-stage SCLC in three of 24 patients. FDG-PET correctly upstaged two (8.3%) of 24 patients to extensive-stage disease (95% CI, 1.03% to 27.0%). PET correctly identified tumor in each SCLC mass (primary or nodal) that was suspected on computed tomography (CT) imaging, thus giving a lesion-based sensitivity relative to CT of 100%. PET identified unsuspected regional nodal metastasis in six (25%) of 24 patients, and the radiation therapy plan was significantly altered to include the PET-positive/CT-negative nodes within the high-dose region in each of these patients. Brain PET images in 23 patients disclosed no evidence of brain metastasis. CONCLUSION: FDG-PET has high sensitivity for SCLC and appears to be of value for initial staging and treatment planning of patients with presumed limited-stage disease.
['Adult', 'Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Carcinoma, Small Cell/*diagnostic imaging/pathology', 'Female', 'Fluorodeoxyglucose F18', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnostic imaging/pathology', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Neoplasm Metastasis/diagnostic imaging', '*Neoplasm Staging', 'Patient Care Planning', 'Prospective Studies', 'Radiopharmaceuticals', 'Sensitivity and Specificity', 'Time Factors', '*Tomography, Emission-Computed', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']