Robust anisotropic Gaussian fitting for volumetric characterization of pulmonary nodules in multislice CT.
This paper proposes a robust statistical estimation and verification framework for characterizing the ellipsoidal (anisotropic) geometrical structure of pulmonary nodules in the Multislice X-ray computed tomography (CT) images. Given a marker indicating a rough location of a target, the proposed solution estimates the target's center location, ellipsoidal boundary approximation, volume, maximum/average diameters, and isotropy by robustly and efficiently fitting an anisotropic Gaussian intensity model. We propose a novel multiscale joint segmentation and model fitting solution which extends the robust mean shift-based analysis to the linear scale-space theory. The design is motivated for enhancing the robustness against margin-truncation induced by neighboring structures, data with large deviations from the chosen model, and marker location variability. A chi-square-based statistical verification and analytical volumetric measurement solutions are also proposed to complement this estimation framework. Experiments with synthetic one-dimensional and two-dimensional data clearly demonstrate the advantage of our solution in comparison with the gamma-normalized Laplacian approach (Linderberg, 1998) and the standard sample estimation approach (Matei, 2001). A quasi-real-time three-dimensional nodule characterization system is developed using this framework and validated with two clinical data sets of thin-section chest CT images. Our experiments with 1310 nodules resulted in (1) robustness against intraoperator and interoperator variability due to varying marker locations, (2) 81% correct estimation rate, (3) 3% false acceptance and 5% false rejection rates, and (4) correct characterization of clinically significant nonsolid ground-glass opacity nodules. This system processes each 33-voxel volume-of-interest by an average of 2 s with a 2.4-GHz Intel CPU. Our solution is generic and can be applied for the analysis of blob-like structures in various other applications.
['*Algorithms', 'Anisotropy', 'Artificial Intelligence', 'Cluster Analysis', 'Computer Simulation', 'Humans', 'Imaging, Three-Dimensional/*methods', 'Information Storage and Retrieval/methods', 'Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging', 'Models, Biological', 'Models, Statistical', 'Normal Distribution', 'Observer Variation', 'Pattern Recognition, Automated/*methods', 'Radiographic Image Enhancement/*methods', 'Radiographic Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted/*methods', 'Reproducibility of Results', 'Sensitivity and Specificity', 'Signal Processing, Computer-Assisted', 'Solitary Pulmonary Nodule/*diagnostic imaging', 'Subtraction Technique', 'Tomography, Spiral Computed/*methods']