Multi-detector row CT: is prospective electrocardiographic triggering improving the detection of small pulmonary tumors?
RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: To compare prospectively ECG-triggered multi-detector row computed tomography (ECG-MDR-CT) and multi-detector row computed tomography (MDR-CT) without triggering for the detection of pulmonary tumors. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 100 patients with proven or suspected tumors were referred for CT of the lung for staging of lung metastases. First, a non-enhanced scan was performed using prospective ECG-triggering on a four-row multidetector helical CT scanner, followed by a contrast-enhanced scan without triggering. The diagnostic assessibility in detecting intrapulmonary nodules and mediastinal structures was graded using a 5-point scale (rated 1 = bad to 5 = very good image quality). RESULTS: ECG-MDR-CT images detected a total of 26% more pulmonary nodules than MDR-CT. For tumors <5 mm, the detection rate was 62% higher using ECG-triggered scans (P = .024). Subjective assessment found median demarcation ratings for all pulmonary findings of 4 (ECG-MDR-CT) versus 3 (MDR-CT). Mediastinal structures were delineated better using ECG triggering. The median ranking for demarcation of pulmonary findings <10 mm was 4 on ECG-MDR-CT and 3 on MDR-CT, respectively. For vessels and the left bronchus, the median of demarcation was 4 on triggered images and 2 on MDR-CT, respectively. The median values referring to the demarcation of mediastinal structures were not significantly different between ECG-MDR-CT and MDR-CT. CONCLUSION: Our data indicate the superiority of prospectively triggered ECG-MDR-CT over MDR-CT for the diagnosis of small pulmonary tumors using a 4-row multidetector CT.
['Adult', 'Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', '*Electrocardiography', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Image Processing, Computer-Assisted', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnostic imaging', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Prospective Studies', 'Statistics, Nonparametric', 'Tomography, Spiral Computed/*methods']