[Medium and long-term results of the use of videothorascopy in surgery of pulmonary metastasis resection].
The surgical resection of pulmonary metastases is a method of treatment accepted as habitual in thoracic surgery. However, it continues to be a source of controversy if this resection must be realised by thoracotomy or by modern video-assisted techniques. With the aim of finding a response to this controversy in our work milieu, a review was made of the surgical interventions carried out in order to resect pulmonary metastases. Between January 1997 and December 2001, 56 patients were found whose pulmonary metastases had been resected by videothorascopy out of a total of 252 metastasectomies (22.2%). The primary tumours were classified in 4 groups: sarcoma (n=11); colorectal (n=25); renal (n=5); and others (n=15). Videothorascopy was carried out on the right hemithorax (n=28), left hemithorax (n=22) or on both at once (n=6). Operational mortality was nil and the only morbidity attributable to the technique was a defect of re-expansion following the removal of the thoracic drainage in one patient. Using the Kaplan-Meier method, the probability of survival in this series of patients was 60.4% after 5 years, with an average survival time of 48 months. All of this data supports the use of videothorascopy in our milieu on patients with pulmonary metastases. However, in the light of the results, it is important in using this technique to place special emphasis on obtaining good margins of resection, due to the real risk of local recurrence on these margins in the medium term.
['Adolescent', 'Adult', 'Aged', 'Child', 'Colorectal Neoplasms', 'Data Interpretation, Statistical', 'Drainage', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Kidney Neoplasms', 'Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/mortality/*secondary/*surgery', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Neoplasm Recurrence, Local', 'Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Radiography, Thoracic', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Survival Analysis', '*Thoracic Surgery, Video-Assisted', 'Thoracotomy', 'Time Factors', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']