[Impact of multi-layer spiral CT angiography of bronchial artery and pulmonary artery in assessment of the main blood supply to the primary lung cancer].
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the blood supply of primary lung cancer (PLC) using CT angiography for bronchial artery (BA) and pulmonary artery (PA). METHODS: Thin-section enhanced multi-layer spiral CT (MSCT) were carried out in 147 primary lung cancer patients and 46 healthy subjects as control. Three-dimensional images of bronchial artery and pulmonary artery were obtained using volume render (VR) and multi-planar reconstruction (MPR) or maximum intensity projection (MIP) at the workstation, and their morphological findings and relationship with the mass were assessed. RESULTS: 136 primary lung cancer patients and 32 healthy controls were evaluated for at least one bronchial artery displayed clearly in VR. The detective rate of the bronchial artery was 92.5% and 69.6%, respectively. The bronchial artery caliber and the total section area of lesion side in lung cancer patients were significantly larger than that on the contralateral side and that of the control (P < 0.05). Bronchial artery on the lesion side in lung cancer was dilated and tortuous, directly penetrating into the mass with reticularly anastomosed branches. In the PLC patients, all PA were shown clearly with normal morphological image though crossing over the masses in 54 patients; In 25 PLC patients, the PA being essentially intact, was pushed around and surrounded the mass, giving the "hold ball" sign; In 40 other PLC patients, PA being also intact, the mass surrounded and buried the PA from the outside, crushing the PA flat resulting in an eccentric or centrifugal shrinkage, forming the "dead branch" sign; In the rest 28 patients, the PA was surrounded and even compressed, forming the "residual root" sign. CONCLUSION: Primary lung cancer patient shows dilated bronchial arteries and increased bronchial artery blood flow, whereas pulmonary arteries just pass through the mass or are compressed by the mass. It is further demonstrated that the bronchial artery, instead of the pulmonary artery, is the main vessel of blood supply to the primary lung cancer as shown by MSCT angiography of bronchial artery and pulmonary artery.
['Adenocarcinoma/blood supply/diagnostic imaging', 'Angiography/methods', 'Bronchial Arteries/*diagnostic imaging', 'Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/blood supply/diagnostic imaging', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*blood supply/diagnostic imaging', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Pulmonary Artery/*diagnostic imaging', 'Tomography, Spiral Computed/*methods']