Spinal metastasis of occult lung carcinoma causing cauda equina syndrome.
Cauda equina syndrome (CES) may be caused by tumor, herniated disc, trauma and spinal infections. However, CES due to occult lung cancer has not been reported in the literature. A 50-year-old man presented with a subacute CES caused by an intradural metastasis of an adenocarcinoma of the lung to the lumbosacral cauda fibers. His lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), showed a well-demarcated, intradural extramedullary mass lesion resembling a neurinoma at the L4/5 level. The patient underwent an L4-L5 laminectomy. The operative findings were also suggestive of neurinoma with involvement of three nerve roots, and a well-demarcated tumor without infiltration into the subarachnoid space. Although the findings of the operation were suggestive of neurinoma, final pathological diagnosis revealed metastatic carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry revealed clear cell adenocarcinoma metastasis. Chest X-ray and high resolution contrasted pulmonary computed tomography were normal. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed a lung mass, at the left apex. The patient was treated with chemotherapy and post-operative spinal radiotherapy was also performed. The CES resolved after the operation and the patient was followed up for 2 years with no recurrence. MRI of intradural cauda equina metastasis may be similar to that of intradural nerve sheath tumor. Surgery and postoperative radiotherapy may be effective for the treatment of CES due to lung carcinoma. Definitive diagnosis is by histopathological examination with immunohistochemistry. If the primary cancer cannot be detected by conventional radiological techniques, PET may be helpful.
['Adenocarcinoma, Clear Cell/*secondary/surgery', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy/*pathology', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Peripheral Nervous System Neoplasms/*secondary/surgery', 'Polyradiculopathy/*etiology/pathology/surgery', 'Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Spinal Cord Neoplasms/pathology/radiotherapy/secondary/surgery', 'Treatment Outcome']