Automated detection of small pulmonary nodules in whole lung CT scans.
RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: The objective of this work was to develop and evaluate a robust algorithm that automatically detects small solid pulmonary nodules in whole lung helical CT scans from a lung cancer screening study. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We developed a three-stage detection algorithm for both isolated and attached nodules. The algorithm consisted of nodule search space demarcation, nodule candidates' generation, and a sequential elimination of false positives. Isolated nodules are nodules that are surrounded by lung parenchyma, whereas attached nodules are connected to large, dense structures such as pleural and/or mediastinal surface. Two large well-documented whole lung CT scan databases (Databases A and B) were created to train and test the detection algorithm. Database A contains 250 sequentially selected scans with 2.5-mm slice thickness that were obtained at Weill Medical College of Cornell University. With equipment upgrade at this college, a second database, Database B, was created containing 250 scans with a 1.25-mm slice thickness. A total of 395 and 482 nodules were identified in Databases A and B, respectively. In both databases, the majority of the nodules were isolated, comprising 72.1% and 82.3% of nodules in Databases A and B, respectively. RESULTS: The detection algorithm was trained and tested on both Databases A and B. For isolated nodules with sizes 4 mm or larger, the algorithm achieved 94.0% sensitivity and 7.1 false positives per case (FPPC) for Database A (2.5 mm). Similarly, the algorithm achieved 91% sensitivity and 6.9 FPPC for Database B (1.25 mm). The algorithm achieved 92% sensitivity with 17.4 FPPC and 89% sensitivity with 5.5 FFPC for attached nodules with sizes 3 mm or larger in the Database A (2.5 mm) and Database B (1.25 mm), respectively. CONCLUSION: The developed algorithm achieved practical performance for automated detection of both isolated and the more challenging attached nodules. The automated system will be a useful tool to assist radiologists in identifying nodules from whole lung CT scans in a clinical setting.
['*Algorithms', 'False Positive Reactions', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnostic imaging', 'Radiographic Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted/*methods', 'Solitary Pulmonary Nodule/*diagnostic imaging', 'Tomography, Spiral Computed/*methods']