Comparison of plan quality provided by intensity-modulated arc therapy and helical tomotherapy.
PURPOSE: Intensity-modulated arc therapy (IMAT) is an arc-based approach to intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) that can be delivered on a conventional linear accelerator using a conventional multileaf collimator. In a previous work, we demonstrated that our arc-sequencing algorithm can produce highly conformal IMAT plans. Through plan comparisons, we explored the ability of IMAT to serve as an alternative to helical tomotherapy. METHODS AND MATERIALS: The IMAT plans were created for 10 patients previously treated with helical tomotherapy. Treatment plan comparisons, according to the target dose coverage and critical structure sparing, were performed to determine whether similar plan quality could be achieved using IMAT. RESULTS: In 8 of 10 patient cases, IMAT was able to provide plan quality comparable to that of helical tomotherapy. In 2 of these 8 cases, the use of non-axial coplanar or non-coplanar arcs in IMAT planning led to significant improvements in normal tissue sparing. The remaining 2 cases posed particular dosimetric challenges. In 1 case, the target was immediately adjacent to a spinal cord that had received previous irradiation. The second case involved multiple target volumes and multiple prescription levels. Both IMAT and tomotherapy were able to produce clinically acceptable plans. Tomotherapy, however, provided a more uniform target dose and improved critical structure sparing. CONCLUSIONS: For most cases, IMAT can provide plan qualities comparable to that of helical tomotherapy. For some intracranial tumors, IMAT's ability to deliver non-coplanar arcs led to significant dosimetric improvements. Helical tomotherapy, however, can provide improved dosimetric results in the most complex cases.
['*Algorithms', 'Brain Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/radiotherapy', 'Esophageal Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/radiotherapy', 'Glioblastoma/diagnostic imaging/radiotherapy', 'Head and Neck Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/radiotherapy', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/radiotherapy', 'Male', 'Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/*radiotherapy', 'Orbital Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/radiotherapy', 'Prostatic Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/radiotherapy', 'Radiotherapy Dosage', 'Radiotherapy Planning, Computer-Assisted/*methods', 'Radiotherapy, Intensity-Modulated/*methods', 'Rectal Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/radiotherapy', 'Tomography, Spiral Computed']