Beliefs among physicians in the diagnostic and therapeutic approach to non-small cell lung cancer.
PURPOSE: The American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) has established evidence-based guidelines for the evaluation and treatment of patients with lung cancer. Physicians' beliefs and practice patterns may differ significantly from established guidelines. We conducted a survey to assess and compare physician beliefs against the evidence-based guidelines. METHODS: A survey was sent by electronic mail (e-mail) in March 2006 to 2100 randomly selected physicians who were members of the ACCP practicing in the United States, followed by two reminder e-mails. RESULTS: Three hundred forty-seven surveys were completed and evaluable. The majority (84%) of the respondents reported having read, consulted, or used the guidelines to set practice policies, and 75% found the guidelines helpful. The respondents' practice beliefs were in agreement with the guidelines on the evaluation of operable patients with enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes, the role of chemotherapy in the treatment of stage III disease, and the evaluation of a solitary pulmonary nodule. Nevertheless, a significant percentage of respondents' practice beliefs differed from the guidelines on issues such as screening for lung cancer, the survival benefit of chemotherapy in stage IV disease, and postoperative radiation therapy. Only a minority of respondents believed that chemotherapy improved quality of life in stage IV disease. The survey results indicate that there has been acceptance of the adjuvant chemotherapy and increasing integration of positron emission tomography in the evaluation of a solitary pulmonary nodule and in staging the mediastinum. CONCLUSIONS: The majority of physicians found the evidence-based guidelines beneficial; nevertheless, practice beliefs differ from the guidelines in select areas.
['Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/*diagnosis/mortality/*therapy', '*Clinical Competence', 'Combined Modality Therapy', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnosis/mortality/*therapy', 'Male', 'Neoplasm Staging', '*Outcome Assessment (Health Care)', '*Practice Guidelines as Topic', 'Quality of Life', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Severity of Illness Index', 'Surveys and Questionnaires', 'Survival Rate', 'United States/epidemiology']