11C-Acetate can be used in place of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose for positron emission tomography imaging of non-small cell lung cancer with higher sensitivity for well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
OBJECTIVES: Although positron emission tomography (PET) using F-fluorodeoxy-glucose (FDG) frequently gives false-negative results for slow-growing tumors, C-acetate (AC)-PET has been reported to be able to detect them. To determine the usefulness of AC-PET for imaging non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs), the sensitivity and specificity were compared between the AC-PET and FDG-PET with a multicenter study. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 284 pulmonary lesions (227 NSCLCs and 57 benign lesions) were examined using both AC-PET and FDG-PET before surgery at seven Japanese institutes. The AC- or FDG-uptake in each lesion were quantitatively measured using the contrast ratio of the standard uptake value between the lesions and the contralateral lung. RESULTS: The sensitivity of AC-PET for diagnosing NSCLC was 0.71, which was significantly higher than the value of 0.57 obtained by FDG-PET (p < 0.001). No significant difference in the specificity was seen between AC- and FDG-PET. For the 146 well-differentiated adenocarcinomas, the sensitivity of AC-PET was 0.62, which was significantly higher than the value of 0.37 obtained by FDG-PET (p < 0.001). Of the 51 moderately- or poorly-differentiated adenocarcinomas and 30 nonadenocarcinomas, there was no significant difference of sensitivity between AC- and FDG-PET. CONCLUSIONS: AC-PET could be used in place of FDG-PET for imaging NSCLC, with higher sensitivity for well-differentiated adenocarcinoma compared with FDG-PET.
['*Acetates', 'Adenocarcinoma/*diagnostic imaging/secondary', '*Carbon', 'Carbon Radioisotopes', 'Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/*diagnostic imaging/secondary', 'Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnostic imaging/secondary', 'Cell Differentiation', '*Fluorodeoxyglucose F18', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnostic imaging/pathology', 'Lymphatic Metastasis', 'Neoplasm Staging', 'Positron-Emission Tomography/*methods', 'Prospective Studies', 'ROC Curve', '*Radiopharmaceuticals', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Sensitivity and Specificity', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']