Clinical characteristics of pleomorphic carcinoma of the lung.
BACKGROUND: Pleomorphic carcinoma of the lung is a malignant epithelial tumor that contains carcinomatous and sarcomatoid components. Due to its rarity, few studies have been reported, and its clinical and pathological characteristics remain unclear. METHOD: We retrospectively investigated 22 cases of pleomorphic carcinoma of the lung. RESULTS: Fifteen cases were diagnosed by surgical resection, 4 by autopsy, and 3 by transbronchial biopsy. Nineteen patients were male and 3 were female, and their mean age at diagnosis was 68.3 years (+/-10.1). Eighteen were current- or ex-smokers with substantial smoking histories (mean 46.4 pack-years). Sixteen patients had symptoms: hemoptysis and cough were commonly seen. Chest computed tomography (CT) findings revealed that the tumors were quite large (mean diameter 45.3+/-21.9mm; range 14-110mm), and 21 tumors were peripherally located. Positron emission tomography with 18-fluorodeoxy-glucose (FDG-PET) was performed in 12 patients, and the Standardized Uptake Value (SUV) tended to be high (9.44+/-4.98). In the 15 patients who underwent surgical resection, recurrence was common; systemic metastases were also frequently found. Patients who had received surgical treatment with proper follow-up care survived longer than those who did not undergo surgery. Responses to chemotherapy were generally poor, although 1 patient exhibited partial response to gefitinib. CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary pleomorphic carcinoma has strong malignant potential with frequent distant metastases, as has already been reported. However, this study demonstrated that surgical treatment and appropriate follow-up therapy might result in better prognoses.
['Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Disease Progression', 'Drug Resistance, Neoplasm', 'Female', 'Hemoptysis', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnosis/*pathology/*physiopathology/surgery', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Neoplasm Metastasis', 'Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']