[Case of squamous cell lung cancer with myocardial metastasis complicated with ventricular tachycardia].
A 67-year-old woman who complained of pain and sensory disturbance in the right upper extremity was admitted. Her chest CT showed a mass lesion in the upper lobe of the right lung, indicating invasion to the chest wall. CT-guided tumor biopsy resulted in a diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma, and FDG-PET scan suggested metastasis to the right supraclavicular lymph node. We diagnosed squamous cell lung cancer (T3N3M0 : stage IIIB) and started chemotherapy using carboplatin and vinorelbine combined with thoracic radiotherapy. At the end of 6th cycles of chemotherapy, exertional dyspnea and palpitations appeared, and she was readmitted. Repeated transthoracic echocardiography showed a deterioration of the thickening of the right ventricular wall. Magnetic resonance imaging and Ga-scintigraphy suggested a neoplastic lesion in the myocardium. Eventually, we diagnosed it as myocardial metastasis from non-small cell lung cancer. Shortly after the beginning of palliative radiotherapy to the myocardial lesion, repeated episodes of ventricular tachycardia emerged. We stopped radiotherapy and managed to control the ventricular tachycardia by initiating amiodarone. Though we administered erlotinib as a second line chemotherapy, the primary tumor and pericardial effusion progressed and pleural effusion appeared, so we discontinued erlotinib. Pericardiocentesis was carried out to improve her symptoms and cytological examination of effusion revealed class IV. Her performance status dropped off and we decided to continue best supportive care. Myocardial metastasis of lung cancer is rarely a clinical problem, but it might have a decisive influence on the patient's prognosis due to serious arrhythmia or some other complications. Therefore, there is a need to consider cardiac involvement in the course of lung cancer.
['Aged', 'Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/complications/diagnosis/pathology/*secondary', 'Female', 'Heart Neoplasms/diagnosis/*secondary', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*complications/diagnosis/*pathology/therapy', '*Myocardium', 'Palliative Care', 'Prognosis', 'Tachycardia, Ventricular/*etiology']