Diagnostics and staging procedures in non-small cell lung cancer - is less more?
INTRODUCTION: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a common cancer with approximately 85% of patients dying of the disease. The only chance for cure is in the early stages, when surgery or definite chemoradiotherapy can be performed. Diagnosis and staging of lung cancer can sometimes be difficult, particularly because the intrathoracic structures are not easy to reach. OBJECTIVE: This review discusses the diagnosis and staging of lung cancer. RESULTS: When performing lung cancer diagnostics, both invasive and noninvasive procedures, such as computed tomogram of the chest, bronchoscopy and abdominal ultrasound, are mandatory. Suspected mediastinal involvement should be differentiated: bulky disease, contralateral or high mediastinal nodes need further clarification by endoscopic ultrasound, endobronchial ultrasound or mediastinoscopy. In opposition to current guidelines, in all other cases, surgery should be performed. Positron emission tomography will gain even more importance when becoming widely accessible and might replace other imaging techniques in the future. In case of advanced disease, staging should be limited to those examinations with impact on symptom control. CONCLUSION: The diagnosis and staging of lung cancer should involve both invasive and noninvasive diagnostic procedures. In the case of advanced disease, staging should be limited to those examinations with impact on symptom control, whereas early stages call for rapid and thorough diagnosis.
['Abdomen/diagnostic imaging', 'Algorithms', 'Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging', 'Brain Neoplasms/diagnosis/secondary', 'Bronchoscopy', 'Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/*diagnosis/pathology', 'Endoscopy', 'Endosonography', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnosis/pathology', 'Magnetic Resonance Imaging', 'Mediastinum/pathology', 'Neoplasm Staging/*methods', 'Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Punctures', 'Radiography, Abdominal', 'Radiography, Thoracic', 'Thoracic Surgery, Video-Assisted', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']