Incidence of highly important extravascular findings detected on CT angiography of the abdominal aorta and the lower extremities.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine the frequency and significance of extravascular findings on CT angiography of the abdominal aorta and lower extremities. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Reports of CT angiograms of the abdominal aorta and lower extremities for 275 patients (164 men and 111 women; mean age, 72 years) were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were scanned from the level of diaphragm to toes. Extravascular findings were classified into three groups-low, moderate, and high importance-on the basis of clinical significance. Low-importance findings were defined as those with little, if any, clinical significance. Moderate-importance findings were those that may not be clinically apparent but recognition of which could be beneficial at a later time. Highly important findings were defined as previously unknown results requiring further imaging or investigation. For highly important findings, electronic chart review determined the subsequent clinical course. RESULTS: Highly important extravascular findings were found in 40 (15%) patients. Of 462 findings overall, 43 (9%) were of high importance, 77 (17%) were of moderate importance, and 342 (74%) were of low importance. The most common highly important findings were indeterminate lesions of kidney (n = 9), lung (n = 7), and liver (n = 6). Overall, eight (3%) of the 275 patients had findings of high clinical significance that resulted in medical therapy or surgical intervention, including lung carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, colon carcinoma, cholangiocarcinoma, and pulmonary coccidioidomycosis. CONCLUSION: Of patients undergoing CT angiography of the abdominal aorta and lower extremities, 15% had previously undiagnosed, highly important findings. Radiologists and referring clinicians should be aware of the frequency of these clinically significant extravascular findings at CT angiography.
['Adult', 'Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Angiography/*methods', '*Aorta, Abdominal', 'Aortic Diseases/*diagnostic imaging', 'Contrast Media', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Incidence', '*Incidental Findings', 'Iohexol', 'Lower Extremity/blood supply/*diagnostic imaging', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Radiographic Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Tomography, Spiral Computed/*methods']