Localized mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma of the lung: thin-section computed tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography findings.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to evaluate thinsection computed tomography (CT) and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) findings of localized pulmonary mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinomas (BACs). METHODS AND MATERIALS: From February 2000 to February 2009, there were seven patients with pulmonary localized mucinous BACs that were pathologically confirmed in the surgical specimens. Their CT findings were assessed regarding location, extent (percent) of groundglass opacity (GGO), margin characteristics, and the presence of air-containing spaces and contractive changes. We evaluated the presence of the "angiogram sign" in the patients who underwent enhanced CT. The maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) on FDG-PET was measured in four cases. RESULTS: All tumors were located in the lower lobes. The percentages of GGOs ranged from 0% to 70% (average 20%). The tumor margins were well defined in five cases and ill-defined in two cases. Air-containing spaces were seen in all cases. Evidence of contractive change was seen in two of the seven cases. The angiogram sign was identified in one of five patients who underwent enhanced CT. The SUVmax on FDG-PET ranged from 0.93 to 1.97 (mean 1.53). CONCLUSION: The imaging features of localized mucinous BACs include solid or partly solid attenuation, the presence of air-containing spaces, lack of contractive changes, and lower lobe predominance. Additionally, the SUVmax is markedly low on FDG-PET.
['Adenocarcinoma, Bronchiolo-Alveolar/*diagnostic imaging/pathology', 'Adenocarcinoma, Mucinous/*diagnostic imaging/pathology', 'Adult', 'Aged', 'Female', 'Fluorodeoxyglucose F18', 'Goblet Cells/pathology', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnostic imaging/pathology', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Positron-Emission Tomography/*methods', 'Radiopharmaceuticals', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed/*methods']