[Adenocarcinoma of the rete testis. A case report].
Adenocarcinoma of the rete testis is a rare malignant tumor with a poor prognosis. About 60 cases of this adenocarcinoma have been reported in the literature. The diagnosis is often difficult and made incidentally. Herein, we report a case of adenocarcinoma of the rete testis and review the literature. Our patient was an 80-year-old man who presented with painless scrotal swelling for 2 years. Physical examination revealed an enlarged, hard mass of the left scrotum. The serum markers alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-HCG), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a left hydrocele with central necrosis of the testis. After 4 months, the patient presented with appetite loss, general fatigue, and pain in the left scrotum. Positron emission tomography (PET) was performed in another hospital, and the patient was referred for a left testicular tumor, multiple lung metastases, and para-aorta lymph node metastasis. The patient underwent left high inguinal orchiectomy. Pathological examination revealed a hard whitish mass around the testis involving the epididymis and tunica vaginalis and spreading under the subcutaneous tissue. Histological examination revealed adenocarcinoma in the hilum of the testis, which extended to the subcutaneous tissue but not to the surface of the scrotum. The tunica albuginea was intact, and no invasion of carcinoma in the testis was seen. After the histological diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of the rete testis was confirmed, computed tomography (CT) was performed and showed multiple pulmonary nodules and para-aortica lymph node swelling of 3 cm diameter. Because the patient did not wish to receive chemotherapy or other aggressive treatment, he has been followed-up with palliative care since his diagnosis. Although local recurrence has occurred 4 months later, he is still alive for 8 months since his diagnosis.
['Adenocarcinoma/diagnosis/secondary/*therapy', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis/secondary', 'Lymphatic Metastasis', 'Magnetic Resonance Imaging', 'Male', 'Orchiectomy', 'Palliative Care', 'Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Testicular Neoplasms/diagnosis/pathology/*therapy', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']