Clinical significance of CT density-based, non-uniform photon attenuation correction of deep-inspiratory breath-hold perfusion SPECT.
PURPOSE: The effect of computed tomography (CT) density-based, non-uniform photon attenuation correction (AC) on lung perfusion distribution and the clinical significance were evaluated. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 40 patients with pulmonary emphysema, 32 with pulmonary thromboembolism, 25 with lung cancer and 8 normal controls underwent deep-inspiratory breath-hold (DIBrH) Tc-99m-MAA perfusion SPECT, using a dual-head SPECT system and a respiratory tracking device. Scatter-corrected DIBrH SPECT was automatically co-registered with DIBrH CT. AC of DIBrH SPECT was performed using an attenuation coefficient map of a variable-effective linear coefficient calculated from CT pixel density of the co-registered DIBrH CT. The effect of AC on pulmonary perfusion was evaluated by comparison with uncorrected SPECT. RESULTS: After AC, lung perfusion in normal lungs was increased predominantly at deep lungs near the mediastinum and vertebrae and at the upper-middle lungs, with systematic increases of radioactivity (145 +/- 28%) and significant enhancement of physiological gravitational ventral-dorsal gradient (P < 0.01). Throughout the lung diseases, AC significantly enhanced perfusion defect clarity and heterogeneity (P < 0.001), without noticeable artifacts. The correlation between perfusion heterogeneity and the lung diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide was significantly improved in patients with emphysema (P < 0.005). CONCLUSION: CT density-based, non-uniform AC of DIBrH perfusion SPECT provides better assessment of physiologic or impaired perfusion distributions in normal and lung diseases.
['Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Image Processing, Computer-Assisted/*methods', '*Inhalation', 'Lung/blood supply/diagnostic imaging/physiopathology', 'Lung Diseases/diagnostic imaging/physiopathology', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Perfusion Imaging/*methods', '*Photons', 'Regional Blood Flow', 'Tomography, Emission-Computed, Single-Photon/*methods', '*Tomography, X-Ray Computed']