Cyclodextrin-mediated entrapment of curcuminoid 4-[3,5-bis(2-chlorobenzylidene-4-oxo-piperidine-1-yl)-4-oxo-2-butenoic acid] or CLEFMA in liposomes for treatment of xenograft lung tumor in rats.
We recently reported a novel curcuminoid 4-[3,5-bis(2-chlorobenzylidene-4-oxo-piperidine-1-yl)-4-oxo-2-butenoic acid] or CLEFMA as a potent anti-proliferative agent, and showed that it induces autophagic cell death in lung cancer cells. We are now reporting a drug-in-CD-in-liposome approach to formulate CLEFMA liposomes that could be labeled with Tc-99m radionuclide for non-invasive imaging of their biodistribution. CLEFMA encapsulation was enabled by hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin. In vitro studies showed that CLEFMA possessed more potent anti-proliferative activity in lung adenocarcinoma H441 cells than naturally occurring curcumin. At the same time, it had no effect on the proliferative capacity of normal lung fibroblasts. CLEFMA liposomes retained the antiproliferative potency of free CLEFMA, while maintaining its non-toxic nature in normal lung fibroblasts. In nude rats bearing xenograft H441 tumors, the tumor volume significantly reduced after i.v. treatment with CLEFMA liposomes (p<0.05); the tumor inhibition was determined to be 94%. The anti-tumor activity of CLEFMA liposomes was confirmed by the observation that F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in tumors of treated rats was reduced as compared to those of control rats. Tc-99m-labeled CLEFMA liposomes accumulated in liver (33.7%); spleen showed the largest accumulation on per gram tissue basis (6.2%/g). Upon histopathological examination of liver, lung and kidney, we found no apparent toxicity from multiple CLEFMA liposome administrations. The results demonstrate the utility of liposomes to serve as a carrier for CLEFMA. This study is the first to demonstrate the efficacy of novel curcuminoid CLEFMA in a preclinical model.
['Animals', 'Antineoplastic Agents/chemistry/therapeutic use', 'Cell Proliferation/drug effects', 'Cell Survival', 'Cyclodextrins/*chemistry', 'Disease Models, Animal', '*Drug Delivery Systems', '*Liposomes', 'Lung Neoplasms/*drug therapy', 'Piperidones/chemistry/*therapeutic use', 'Rats']