Protons safely allow coverage of high-risk nodes for patients with regionally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.
Our objective was to determine if protons allow for the expansion of treatment volumes to cover high-risk nodes in patients with regionally advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. In this study, 5 consecutive patients underwent external-beam radiotherapy treatment planning. Four treatment plans were generated for each patient: 1) photons (x-rays) to treat positron emission tomography (PET)-positive gross disease only to 74 Gy (XG); 2) photons (x-rays) to treat high-risk nodes to 44 Gy and PET-positive gross disease to 74 Gy (XNG); 3) protons to treat PET-positive gross disease only to 74 cobalt gray equivalent (PG); and 4) protons to treat high-risk nodes to 44 CGE and PET-positive gross disease to 74 CGE (PNG). We defined high-risk nodes as mediastinal, hilar, and supraclavicular lymph nodal stations anatomically adjacent to the foci of PET-positive gross disease. Four-dimensional computed tomography was utilized for all patients to account for tumor motion. Standard normal-tissue constraints were utilized. Our results showed that proton plans for all patients were isoeffective with the corresponding photon (x-ray) plans in that they achieved the desired target doses while respecting normal-tissue constraints. In spite of the larger volumes covered, median volume of normal lung receiving 10 CGE or greater (V10Gy/CGE), median V20Gy/CGE, and mean lung dose were lower in the proton plans (PNG) targeting gross disease and nodes when compared with the photon (x-ray) plans (XG) treating gross disease alone. In conclusion, proton plans demonstrated the potential to safely include high-risk nodes without increasing the volume of normal lung irradiated when compared to photon (x-ray) plans, which only targeted gross disease.
['Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/pathology/*radiotherapy', 'Esophagus/radiation effects', 'Four-Dimensional Computed Tomography', 'Heart/radiation effects', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/pathology/*radiotherapy', 'Lymph Nodes', 'Neoplasm Staging', 'Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Protons/*therapeutic use', 'Radiotherapy Dosage', 'Radiotherapy Planning, Computer-Assisted/*methods', 'Radiotherapy, Intensity-Modulated/*methods', 'Spinal Cord/radiation effects', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']