The value of post-neoadjuvant therapy PET-CT in the detection of interval metastases in esophageal carcinoma.
BACKGROUND: PET-CT scanning is increasingly applied in the primary work-up of esophageal cancer patients. The additional value of a second PET-CT after completion of neoadjuvant therapy (NT) prior to surgery is presently unclear. Therefore, a consecutive series of esophageal cancer patients underwent PET-CT scanning after completion of NT for evaluation of metastatic disease that became manifest under NT. METHODS: A consecutive series of patients planned for curative esophagectomy who underwent a PET-CT prior to and after NT were included in this study. Neoadjuvant therapy consisted of 5FU and cisplatinum combined with 50.4Gy radiotherapy. The first PET-CT was performed as part of the diagnostic work-up, the second PET-CT was performed after completion of NT and prior to surgery. Median interval between NT and second PETCT was 6 weeks. In case of metastatic disease on the post-neoadjuvant therapy PET-CT confirmed by a biopsy, patients were excluded from surgical resection. RESULTS: Between November 2008 and July 2010 a total of 50 patients underwent first and second PET-CT scanning. 80% of patients was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma, 18% with squamous cell carcinoma. Confirmed metastatic disease on the second PET-CT was present in 4/50 patients (8%). These patients were excluded from resection. A false-positive diagnosis concerning a pulmonary lesion was present in 1 patient (2%); this infiltrate had disappeared on follow up imaging. DISCUSSION: This study showed development of metastatic disease during NT detected by PET-CT in 8% of esophageal cancer patients, suggesting an additional value of a second PET-CT in order to prevent unnecessary surgical resections.
['Adenocarcinoma/pathology', 'Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use', 'Bone Neoplasms/diagnosis/secondary', 'Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/pathology', 'Cisplatin/therapeutic use', 'Esophageal Neoplasms/*pathology/therapy', 'Esophagectomy', 'Female', 'Fluorodeoxyglucose F18', 'Humans', 'Liver Neoplasms/diagnosis/secondary', 'Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis/secondary', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', '*Neoadjuvant Therapy', '*Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Radiopharmaceuticals', 'Radiotherapy, Conformal', '*Tomography, X-Ray Computed']