Impact of time-of-flight and point-spread-function in SUV quantification for oncological PET.
BACKGROUND: Accuracy in the quantification of the SUV is a critical point in PET because proper quantification of tumor uptake is essential for therapy monitoring and prognosis evaluation. Recent advances such as time-of-flight (TOF) and point-spread-function (PSF) reconstructions have dramatically improved detectability. However, first experiences with these techniques have shown a consistent tendency to measure markedly high SUV values, bewildering nuclear medicine physicians and referring clinicians. PURPOSE: We investigated different reconstruction and quantification procedures to determine the optimum protocol for an accurate SUV quantification in last generation PET scanners. METHODS: Both phantom and patient images were evaluated. A complete set of experiments was performed using a body phantom containing 6 spheres with different background levels and contrasts. Whole-body FDG PET/CT of 20 patients with breast and lung cancer was evaluated. One hundred five foci were identified by 2 experienced nuclear medicine physicians.Each acquisition was reconstructed both with classical and advanced (TOF, PSF) reconstruction techniques. Each sphere and each in vivo lesion was quantified with different parameters as follows: SUV(max), SUV(mean), and SUV(50) (mean within a 50% isocontour). RESULTS: This study has confirmed that quantification with SUV(max) produces important overestimation of metabolism in new generation PET scanners. This is a relevant result because, currently, SUV(max) is the standard parameter for quantification. SUV(50) has been shown as the best alternative, especially when applied to images reconstructed with PSF + TOF. CONCLUSIONS: SUV(50) provides accurate quantification and should replace SUV(max) in PET tomographs incorporating advanced reconstruction techniques. PSF + TOF reconstruction is the optimum for both detection and accurate quantification.
['Biological Transport', 'Breast Neoplasms/*diagnostic imaging/metabolism', 'Humans', 'Image Processing, Computer-Assisted/*methods', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnostic imaging/metabolism', 'Multimodal Imaging/*methods', 'Phantoms, Imaging', '*Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Time Factors', '*Tomography, X-Ray Computed', 'Whole Body Imaging']