A study of 131iodine-labeling of histamine-indomethacin: its in vivo therapeutic effect and anti-tumor mechanisms in Lewis-bearing lung cancer.
BACKGROUND: In our research,we study the effect of 131iodine-labeled histamine-indomethacin (131I-His-IN). We focus on its in vivo therapeutic effect and anti-tumor mechanisms in Lewis-bearing lung cancer. METHODS: 131I-His-IN was administered by garage to the mice. At different timepoints, we made autoradiography (ARG) slices to observe the distribution of 131I-His-IN in the cellular, and the sliced samples underwent hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining for observation of tumor necrosis. Before treatment, the groups of mice underwent 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scans ,and they were then given physiologic saline, iodine 131 (131I), indomethacin (IN), Histamine-indomethacin (His-IN), and 131I-His-IN, respectively, three times daily for seven days. Seven days later, all the mice underwent 18F-FDG PET-CT scans again. We calculated the maximum standard uptake value (SUVmax) of the region of interest (ROI) and tumor inhibition rate at the same time. RESULTS: In ARG groups, black silver particle was concentrated in the nucleus and cytoplasm. 131I-His-IN mainly concentrated in tumor tissues. At 8 hours after 131I-His-IN, the radioactivity uptake in tumor tissue was higher than in other organs (F=3.46, P<0.05). For the 18F-FDG PET-CT imaging, the tumor tissuses SUVmax of the ROI was lower compared to other groups after the treatment with 131I-His-IN. The tumor inhibitory rate (54.8%) in 131I-His-IN group was higher than in other groups, too. In the 131I-His-IN group the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) decreased gradually compared to other groups. The tumor tissue necrotized obviously in 131I-His-IN group. CONCLUSIONS: Through these animal experiments, we found 131I-His-IN could inhibit the Lewis lung cancer cells. 131I-His-IN focused at the cell nucleus and cytoplasm. It could reduce VEGF and increase tumor inhibitory rate. At the same time, 18F-FDG PET-CT scan could be used for a curative effect and monitoring of disease prognosis.
['Animals', 'Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacokinetics/*pharmacology', 'Autoradiography', 'Carcinoma, Lewis Lung/blood/*diagnostic imaging/pathology', 'Histamine/pharmacokinetics/pharmacology', 'Indomethacin/pharmacokinetics/*pharmacology', 'Iodine Radioisotopes/pharmacokinetics/*pharmacology', 'Mice', 'Multimodal Imaging', 'Positron-Emission Tomography', 'Radioisotopes/pharmacokinetics/pharmacology', 'Radiopharmaceuticals', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed', 'Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/blood']