[Prediction of postoperative pulmonary function using 99mTc-MAA perfusion lung SPECT].
In order to predict postoperative pulmonary function, 99mTc-MAA perfusion lung SPECT and spirometry were performed preoperatively in 52 patients with resectable primary lung cancer; 44 underwent lobectomy, eight pneumonectomy. Local pulmonary function (called local effective volume) was evaluated according to the degree of radionuclide distribution of each voxel in the SPECT images. The total effective volume was defined as the sum of the local effective volume, and the residual effective volume was the total effective volume excluding loss after operation. Predicted pulmonary function (VC and FEV1.0) was calculated by the following formula: Predicted value = preoperative value x percent of the residual effective volume. Postoperative pulmonary function was predicted in the same patients by means of 99mTc-MAA perfusion lung planar scintigraphy and X-ray CT. The patients were reinvestigated with spirometry at one and four months after surgery, and the values were compared with the predicted values. The correlations between the predicted values using SPECT and measured postoperative pulmonary function were highly significant (VC: r = 0.867, FEV1.0: r = 0.864 one month after operation; VC: r = 0.860, FEV1.0: r = 0.907 4 months after operation). The predicted values calculated using SPECT were accurate compared with the predicted values calculated using planar scintigraphy or X-ray CT. The patients with predicted FEV1.0 of less than 0.8 liter required home oxygen therapy. This method is valuable for the prediction of postoperative pulmonary function before the surgical procedure.
['Adult', 'Aged', 'Aged, 80 and over', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Lung/*diagnostic imaging', 'Lung Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging/physiopathology', 'Male', 'Middle Aged', 'Pneumonectomy', 'Postoperative Period', 'Predictive Value of Tests', 'Pulmonary Circulation', '*Respiration', '*Technetium Tc 99m Aggregated Albumin', '*Tomography, Emission-Computed, Single-Photon']