Application of electrical impedance tomography in diagnosis of emphysema--a clinical study.
In this paper, electrical impedance tomography (EIT) ventilation images from a group of 12 patients (11 patients with emphysema and one patient with only chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (chronic bronchitis) and a group of 15 normal subjects were acquired using a Sheffield mark 1 EIT system, at the levels of second, fourth and sixth intercostal spaces. Patients were diagnosed based on CT scans of the thorax, pulmonary function tests and posteroanterior x-ray graphs. One of the patients with emphysema has also a malignant lung tumour. Ventilation-related conductivity changes at total lung capacity (TLC) relative to residual volume were measured quantitatively in EIT images. These quantitative values demonstrate marked differences compared to those values obtained from the EIT images of 15 normal subjects. The EIT images of the patients were also compared with the CT images. In addition to the visual examination of the EIT images a statistical confidence test is applied to compare the images of the patients with the images of the normal subjects. Prior to statistical analysis all images are normalized with TLC to minimize the effect of mismatch between the TLC of different subjects. A normal mean image is created by averaging the normalized images from the normal subjects, at each intercostal space level. Than a 95% confidence interval is defined for each normal mean image. For each image of the patients, a confidence test image, which represents the deviations from the 95% confidence interval of the normal mean image, is created. The regions with emphysematous bulla and parencyhma are detectable in the confidence test images as regions of positive and negative deviations from the confidence interval of the normal mean, respectively. In the test images, it is possible to differentiate emphysematous parenchyma from emphysematous bulla, tumour structure, and COPD. However, the emphysematous bulla, the tumour structure, and COPD result in the same type of defect in the test images and are therefore indistinguishable from each other. In some case, off-plane contributions in the EIT images may result in underestimation of the defects. EIT may be a useful screening device in detecting emphysema rather than a diagnostic tool.
['Adult', '*Electric Impedance', 'Emphysema/*diagnosis/diagnostic imaging', 'Humans', 'Image Processing, Computer-Assisted', 'Male', 'Reference Values', 'Residual Volume', 'Tomography/*methods', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed', 'Total Lung Capacity']