[Current capabilities and procedures for diagnosing lung neoplasms].
Lung cancer is the most common malignant cancer in males and it's incidence is rapidly rising in females. Factors linked to this are associated with cigarette smoking, urbanization along with atmospheric pollution. The lack of success in the treatment of lung cancer has to do with in many cases late diagnosis at the stage when surgical treatment is not possible and radio and chemotherapy being of minimal effectiveness. The WHO has proposed the following classification of lung cancer: 1. Squamous cell carcinoma; 2. Small cell carcinoma; 3. Adenocarcinoma; 4. Giant cell carcinoma; 5. Adeno-squamous cell carcinoma 6. Carcinoid. 7. Carcinoma of mucous gland. 8. Others. Early physical signs of lung cancer are: cough (50-80% of patients), dyspnea (10-15%), chest pain (15-20%), hemoptysis (20-50%), recurrent pneumonia and bronchitis (30-50%). More serious clinical signs associated with growth of the neoplasm are hoarseness, pleural effusion, vena cava superior syndrome, and Pancoast's syndrome. The growing neoplasm secrets many biochemical substances, which are them activity passed on the bloodstream or make their way into the blood as a result of degeneration of the tumor. These substances may then be detected in the patient's plasma and act as markers of malignant disease. The characteristics of these markers is varied, e.g.: hormones, enzymes and tissue antigens. Methods used in the diagnosis of lung-cancer which should be stressed, are apart from the obvious physical examination are chest x-rays, ultrasound, CAT scans, nuclear magnetic resonance, PET scans, and scintigraphy. Fine needle aspiration in changes in the peripheral regions, cytology of sputum, bronchial lavage, cytogenetic analysis. This underlines the need for prophylaxis, particularly the cessation of cigarette smoking.
['Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis', 'Biopsy, Needle', 'Bronchoalveolar Lavage Fluid/cytology', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Incidence', 'Lung Neoplasms/*diagnosis/epidemiology/therapy', 'Magnetic Resonance Imaging', 'Male', 'Neoplasm Staging', 'Poland/epidemiology', 'Risk Factors', 'Smoking/prevention & control', 'Survival Rate', 'Tomography, X-Ray Computed']