Cleavage of Mullerian inhibiting substance activates antiproliferative effects in vivo.
Mullerian inhibiting substance (MIS), an inhibitor of growth and development of the female reproductive ducts in male fetuses, requires precise proteolytic cleavage to yield its biologically active species. Human plasmin is now used to cleave and, thereby, activate immunoaffinity-purified recombinant human MIS at its monobasic arginine-serine site at residues 427-428. To avoid the need for exogenous enzymatic cleavage and to simplify purification, we created an arginine-arginine dibasic cleavage site (MIS RR) using site-directed mutagenesis to change the serine at position 428 (AGC) to an arginine (cGC). The mutant cDNA was then stably transfected into a MIS-responsive ocular melanoma cell line, OM431, followed by cloning for amplified expression to test its biological activity in vitro and in vivo. Media from each clone were assayed for production of MIS RR by a sensitive ELISA for holo-MIS, and high- and low-producing clones were selected for further study. Media from the highest MIS RR producer caused Mullerian duct regression in an organ culture bioassay. Other transfections were done with an empty vector (pcDNAI Neo) or a construct lacking the leader sequence and thus failing to secrete MIS, to serve as controls. The OM431 clones containing the MIS RR mutant were growth inhibited in monolayer culture. The high- and low-producing MIS RR OM431 clones, along with transfected OM431 controls, were injected into the tail veins of immunosuppressed severe combined immunodeficiency mice for in vivo analyses. Four to 6 weeks later, pulmonary metastases were counted in uniformly inflated lungs. OM431 clones containing the more easily cleaved MIS RR displayed a significant dose-dependent reduction in pulmonary metastases when compared to the lungs of animals given injections of OM431 clones containing empty vector, leaderless MIS, or wild-type MIS that requires activation by plasmin cleavage. Since the purification protocol of MIS RR is less complicated than that for wild-type MIS, which requires subsequent enzymatic activation, MIS RR can be used for scale-up production with increased yields for further therapeutic trials against MIS-sensitive tumors.
['Animals', 'Anti-Mullerian Hormone', 'Arginine', 'Cell Division', 'Eye Neoplasms/*pathology/therapy', 'Female', 'Fibrinolysin/*metabolism', '*Glycoproteins', 'Growth Inhibitors/genetics/*physiology', 'Humans', 'Lung Neoplasms/pathology/prevention & control/*secondary', 'Male', 'Melanoma/*pathology/therapy', 'Mice', 'Mice, SCID', 'Mullerian Ducts/physiology', 'Mutagenesis, Site-Directed', 'Recombinant Proteins/biosynthesis/isolation & purification/metabolism', 'Serine', 'Testicular Hormones/genetics/*physiology', 'Transfection', 'Tumor Cells, Cultured']