Congenital duodenal obstruction: early antenatal ultrasound diagnosis.
Twenty-nine patients with congenital duodenal obstruction (DO) detected as a "double bubble" (DB) on antenatal ultrasound (US) or diagnosed postnatally were seen at the Women's and Children's Hospital between 1985 and 1994; 24 (83%) had antenatal scans, with 21 (87%) DBs visualised. The 3 fetuses with normal scans who developed DO postnatally had duodenal "windsocks". Five of the 24 scanned patients (21%) were found to have a DB before 20 weeks' gestation: 1 simple duodenal atresia, 2 duodenal atresias with chromosomal abnormalities (1 trisomy 21 and 1 triploidy), 1 biliary atresia with a pre-pyloric vein, and 1 malrotation. Sixteen (67%) cases were detected with scans after 20 weeks (range 28-36 weeks); 12 (75%) of these were done for polyhydramnios. In response to a questionnaire to 9 of the 16 parents whose fetuses underwent a late scan, 5 had had normal early scans elsewhere and 4 did not respond (4 of the remaining 7 had died and 3 were lost to follow-up). Eleven of the 29 patients (38%) had abnormal karyotypes, and 4 (22%) of the 18 with a normal karyotype had associated anomalies. Two sets of familial cases were noted. Early antenatal diagnosis of DO is possible in a minority of cases, and this early diagnosis may be associated with an increased risk of other pathology. Furthermore, early demonstration of a DB at routine US prior to 20 weeks allows appropriate counseling and the option of mid-trimester termination, whereas this is more difficult later in the pregnancy. In all cases detected antenatally, planning of delivery and parent counseling should be achieved.
['Abnormalities, Multiple/*diagnostic imaging/genetics', 'Duodenal Obstruction/complications/*congenital/*diagnostic imaging/genetics', 'Female', 'Genetic Counseling', 'Humans', 'Infant, Newborn', 'Karyotyping', 'Male', 'Pregnancy', 'Pregnancy Trimester, Second', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Surveys and Questionnaires', 'Ultrasonography, Prenatal/*methods']