Diagnosis of aneuploidy in archival, paraffin-embedded pregnancy-loss tissues by comparative genomic hybridization.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the detection of aneuploidy in archival tissues from miscarriages by a method that uses microdissection and DNA extraction of villus cells from paraffin blocks, followed by universal DNA amplification and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). DESIGN: Retrospective analysis. SETTING: Academic medical center. PATIENT(S): Nine archival tissues from cases of spontaneous abortion with trisomy 16 (two cases), trisomy 21 (three cases), trisomy 22 (two cases), triploidy (one case), and monosomy X (one case). INTERVENTION(S): Villus DNA was extracted from microdissected, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. Aneuploidy was detected by CGH after universal amplification of the DNA with the use of degenerate oligonucleotide-primed polymerase chain reaction. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Detection of aneuploidy in archival pregnancy-loss tissues using CGH. RESULT(S): In all nine cases, DNA was successfully extracted from the microdissected tissues and was of sufficient quantity and quality for evaluation by CGH. In six of nine cases, the chromosomal abnormality detected by conventional cytogenetic analysis was identified by CGH: trisomy 16 (2/2), trisomy 21 (3/3), and trisomy 22 (1/2). One case of each of the following was not detectable: triploidy (1/1), monosomy X (1/1), and trisomy 22 (1/2). CONCLUSION(S): We propose CGH as a method for determination of aneuploidy in pregnancy-loss archival tissues when conventional cytogenetic analysis is unsuccessful or when it was not performed when fresh tissue was available.
['Abortion, Spontaneous/*genetics', '*Aneuploidy', 'Archives', '*Chromosome Aberrations', 'Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16', 'Chromosomes, Human, Pair 22', 'Cytogenetic Analysis', 'DNA/analysis/isolation & purification', 'Down Syndrome/genetics', 'Female', 'Fluorescent Dyes', 'Humans', 'Nucleic Acid Hybridization', 'Paraffin', 'Polymerase Chain Reaction', 'Pregnancy', 'Retrospective Studies', 'Tissue Embedding', 'Trisomy', 'X Chromosome']