Embryonic delay in growth and development related to confined placental trisomy 16 mosaicism, diagnosed by I-Space Virtual Reality.
OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the use of a novel three-dimensional (3D) virtual reality (VR) system in the visualization of first trimester growth and development in a case of confined placental trisomy 16 mosaicism (CPM+16). DESIGN: Case report. SETTING: Prospective study on first trimester growth using a 3D VR system. PATIENT(S): A 34-year-old gravida 1, para 0 was seen weekly in the first trimester for 3D ultrasound examinations. INTERVENTION(S): Chorionic villus sampling was performed because of an enlarged nuchal translucency (NT) measurement and low pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A levels, followed by amniocentesis. RESULT(S): Amniocentesis revealed a CPM+16. On two-dimensional (2D) and 3D ultrasound no structural anomalies were found with normal fetal Dopplers. Growth remained below the 2.3 percentile. At 37 weeks, a female child of 2010 g (<2.5 percentile) was born. After birth, growth climbed to the 50th percentile in the first 2 months. CONCLUSION(S): The I-Space VR system provided information about phenotypes not obtainable by standard 2D ultrasound. In this case, the delay in growth and development could be observed very early in pregnancy. Since first trimester screening programs are still improving and becoming even more important, systems such as the I-Space open a new era for in vivo studies on the physiologic and pathologic processes involved in embryogenesis.
['Adult', 'Amniocentesis', 'Chorionic Villi Sampling', '*Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16', 'Female', 'Fetal Growth Retardation/*diagnostic imaging/genetics/metabolism', 'Humans', '*Image Interpretation, Computer-Assisted', 'Imaging, Three-Dimensional', 'Infant, Low Birth Weight', 'Infant, Newborn', 'Live Birth', '*Mosaicism', 'Pregnancy', 'Pregnancy Trimester, Third', 'Pregnancy-Associated Plasma Protein-A/analysis', '*Trisomy', '*Ultrasonography, Prenatal', '*User-Computer Interface']