Second trimester prenatal screening for Down's syndrome in Mainland Chinese subjects using double-marker analysis of alpha-fetoprotein and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin combined with measurement of nuchal fold thickness.
INTRODUCTION: This study examines the effectiveness of double-marker analysis for alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) combined with measurement of nuchal fold thickness (NT) in the detection of Down's syndrome (DS) in Mainland Chinese subjects during second trimester prenatal screening. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We examined pregnant women with a singleton pregnancy between 15 and 21 weeks of gestation who underwent second trimester screening for DS using double-marker analysis for AFP and beta-hCG combined with ultrasound measurement of NT. The combined risk of DS was calculated. A cut-off of 1/270 was used to define a pregnancy at high-risk of DS. Amniocentesis was offered to all patients with high-risk pregnancies. RESULTS: Using double-marker analysis for AFP and beta-hCG in combination with measurement of NT, the detection rate of DS increased from 66.7% to 77.8% when compared with double-marker analysis alone with similar false-positive rates (4.35%, 4.83% respectively). Using receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis, we determined that the double-marker analysis combined with measurement of NT exhibited an increased area under the curve (AUC) of 0.835 (95% CI: 0.743 to 0.927) when compared to double-marker analysis alone, which had an AUC of 0.748 (95% CI: 0.635 to 0.860). In addition, both methods were more effective than any other single test such as AFP, free beta-hCG or NT measurement. CONCLUSION: Second trimester prenatal screening using double-marker analysis for AFP and beta-hCG combined with measurement of NT is effective for the detection of DS in Mainland Chinese pregnancies.
['Adult', 'Biomarkers', 'China', 'Chorionic Gonadotropin, beta Subunit, Human/*blood', 'Down Syndrome/*diagnosis/diagnostic imaging', 'Female', 'Gestational Age', 'Humans', 'Mass Screening', 'Nuchal Translucency Measurement/*methods', 'Pregnancy', '*Pregnancy Trimester, Second', '*Prenatal Diagnosis', 'Risk Assessment', 'Young Adult', 'alpha-Fetoproteins/*analysis']