The chromosome constitution of human preimplantation embryos fertilized in vitro.
The chromosome constitution of five haploid, 178 diploid and 11 triploid embryos fertilized in vitro was determined after fixation on day 2 or day 3 of development. Karyotype analysis of 178 diploid embryos revealed abnormalities in 40 (22.5%) cases: 34 (19.1%) aneuploids, four (2.2%) mosaic embryos and two (1.1%) structural anomalies were identified. The majority of aneuploid karyotypes (28/34) involved a single chromosome but six embryos had aneuploidy of two or three chromosomes. The E group was most frequently involved in aneuploid karyotypes (10/23 hyperdiploid embryos) and trisomy 16, the most common single anomaly in diploid embryos, was detected in 2.2% (4/178) of cases. Only one case of sex chromosome monosomy was identified. An excess of female karyotypes was detected in abnormal cases (sex ratio 0.48); this ratio was significantly (P < 0.05) different from that observed in normal cases (74:64, XY:XX). The incidence of aneuploidy increased with maternal age but this did not reach statistical significance. Embryo morphology and growth rate, assessed by embryo development rating (EDR), did not distinguish between normal (mean score 7.9; mean EDR 96.1) and aneuploid (mean score 8.1; mean EDR, 92.1) embryos. Numbers of hyperploid (n = 17) and hypoploid (n = 11) embryos (non-mosaic cases involving single chromosomes) were not statistically different. The relative proportions of chromosomes involved in trisomic karyotypes showed a remarkable similarity to the pattern in spontaneous abortions. Pronuclear status was an unreliable predictor of ploidy. Small numbers of karyotyped triploid embryos revealed equal proportions of XXX, XXY and XYY embryos.
['Abortion, Spontaneous/genetics', 'Adult', 'Aneuploidy', 'Blastocyst/*ultrastructure', '*Chromosome Aberrations', 'Diploidy', 'Embryonic and Fetal Development', 'Female', '*Fertilization in Vitro', 'Humans', '*Karyotyping', 'Maternal Age', 'Ploidies', 'Pregnancy']