Preimplantation genetic diagnosis increases the implantation rate in human in vitro fertilization by avoiding the transfer of chromosomally abnormal embryos.
OBJECTIVE: To verify the percentage of chromosomally abnormal preimplantation embryos in patients with a poor prognosis and possibly to increase the chance of implantation by selecting chromosomally normal embryos. DESIGN: A prospective, randomized, controlled study. SETTING: In vitro fertilization program at the Reproductive Medicine Unit of the Societa Italiana Studi Medicina della Riproduzione, Bologna, Italy. PATIENT(S): In a total of 28 stimulated cycles, the maternal age was > or = 38 years and/or the patient had > or = 3 previous IVF failures, factors that indicated a poor prognosis. After consent, 11 patients underwent preimplantation genetic diagnosis for aneuploidy, whereas 17 controls underwent assisted zona hatching. INTERVENTION(S): Simultaneous analysis of chromosomes X, Y, 13, 18, and 21 in a blastomere biopsied from day-3 embryos. Chromosomal analysis was performed with fluorescence in situ hybridization. Assisted zona hatching was performed on day-3 embryos from the control-group patients. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Embryo morphology, results of fluorescence in situ hybridization, clinical pregnancies, and implantation. RESULT(S): In the study group, a total of 61 embryos were analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization, and 55% were chromosomally abnormal. Embryo transfer with at least one normal embryo was performed in 10 cycles. Four clinical pregnancies resulted, with a 28.0% implantation rate. In the control group, 41 embryos were transferred in 17 cycles after the assisted zona hatching procedure, yielding four clinical pregnancies and an 11.9% implantation rate. CONCLUSION(S): Infertile patients classified as having a poor prognosis have a high percentage of chromosomally abnormal embryos. The advantage of selecting and transferring embryos with normal fluorescence in situ hybridization results has an immediate impact on implantation.
['Adult', '*Aneuploidy', '*Blastomeres', 'Chromosome Aberrations/*diagnosis', 'Chromosome Disorders', 'Chromosomes, Human, Pair 13/genetics', 'Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/genetics', 'Chromosomes, Human, Pair 21/genetics', '*Embryo Implantation', '*Embryo Transfer', 'Female', '*Fertilization in Vitro', 'Humans', 'In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence', 'Maternal Age', 'Pregnancy', 'Prognosis', 'Prospective Studies', 'Sex Chromosome Aberrations/diagnosis', 'Time Factors']