Chromosomal aberrations in couples undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection: influence on implantation and ongoing pregnancy rates.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence of chromosomal aberrations in couples undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) and their influence on subsequent implantation and ongoing pregnancy rates. DESIGN: Prospective study. SETTING: Fertility center. PATIENT(S): Candidates for ICSI. INTERVENTION(S): Chromosomes were trypsin-banded in 2,280 patients. In all cases, 10 metaphases were karyotyped. Sex chromosome analysis was performed in 10 additional metaphases. When apparent chromosomal aberrations were detected, 100 metaphases were analyzed. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Implantation and ongoing pregnancy rates in couples with a chromosomal disorder. RESULTS: A chromosomal abnormality was demonstrated in 7.2% of all couples. Among the male partners, 4.48% had aberrations. Autosomal aberrations were present in 2.96%, and numerical or structural sex chromosome abnormalities were found in 1.52%. Among the female partners, numerical or structural abnormalities were documented in 9.79%. Only 2.32% of the female partners had autosomal structural abnormalities. Numerical or structural anomalies involving sex chromosomes were found in 7.47%. Implantation rates of 9.4% and 16.3% per embryo were observed in female partners with sex chromosome mosaicism and autosomal aberrations, respectively. In male partners, the respective rates were 3.8% and 23.1%. CONCLUSION(S): The incidence of chromosomal disorders in couples seeking ICSI treatment is considerable, especially minor mosaicism (<10%) of sex chromosomes in the female partners. Preliminary data indicate a low implantation rate in couples with minor mosaicism of sex chromosomes.
['Adult', 'Aged', '*Chromosome Aberrations', 'Cytoplasm', '*Embryo Implantation', 'Female', 'Humans', 'Karyotyping', 'Male', 'Microinjections', 'Middle Aged', 'Pregnancy', '*Pregnancy Rate', '*Reproductive Techniques']